I. TEXT


I.A The Three Guidelines

The Dao of Great Learning lies in making bright virtue brilliant; in
making the people new; in coming to rest at the limit of the good.

Only after wisdom comes to rest does one possess certainty; only
after one possesses certainty can one become tranquil; only after one
becomes tranquil can one become secure; only after one becomes
secure can one contemplate alternatives; only after one can
contemplate alternatives can one comprehend.

Affairs have their roots and branches, situations have their ends and
beginnings. To know what comes first and what comes after is to be
near the Dao.

I.B The Eight Stages

In ancient times, those who wished to make bright virtue brilliant in
the world first ordered their states; those who wished to order their
states first aligned their households; those who wished to align their
households first refined their persons; those who wished to refine
their persons first balanced their minds; those who wished to balance
their minds first perfected the genuineness of their intentions; those
who wished to perfect the genuineness of their intentions first
extended their understanding; extending one’s understanding lies in
aligning affairs.

Only after affairs have been aligned may one’s understanding be
fully extended. Only after one’s understanding is fully extended may
one’s intentions be perfectly genuine. Only after one’s intentions are
perfectly genuine may one’s mind be balanced. Only after one’s
mind is balanced may one’s person be refined. Only after one’s
person is refined may one’s household be aligned. Only after one’s















On the word “Dao,” see
the Glossary.


This is a how-to manual:
steps cannot be skipped.





“Roots and branches”
concerns priority and
causation. “Ends and
beginnings” can be
interpreted as pointing to
critical points of effort
(start and finish) or to the
unceasing flow of events
and consequences
(endings are always
beginnings). “What comes
first” concerns priorities.

“Aligning affairs” is a
contested phrase; it is
discussed in the Glossary.










Here, “refining the
person” appears to
include Stages 1-5.
Lines in gray type are
not part of The Great
Learning. They have been
added to clarify the
structure of the text.






household is aligned may one’s state be ordered. Only after one’s
state is ordered may the world be set at peace.

From the Son of Heaven to the common person, for all alike, refining
the person is the root. That roots should be disordered yet branches
ordered is not possible. That what should be thickened is thin yet
what is thin becomes thick has never yet been so. [This is the
meaning of “knowing the root.”]


II. COMMENTARY

II.A Commentary on the Three Guidelines

II.A.1 Commentary on “Making bright virtue brilliant”

The Announcement of Kang says,

Able to make virtue brilliant.

The Taijia says,

Regard this bright mandate of Tian.

The Canon of Di says,

Able to make sheer virtue brilliant.

In all of these, brilliance was spontaneous.

II.A.2 Commentary on “Making the people new”

The Basin Inscription of Tang says,

Truly new each day.
New each and every day.
Again, new each day.

The Announcement of Kang says,

Make a new people.

The Poetry says:

Though the Zhou is an ancient country

Its mandate is new.

For this reason, the junzi never fails to strive to the utmost.





A “Son of Heaven” rules
over a unified world of
civilization.

Most editions move the
sentence in brackets to
II.B.1-2, below.




Commentary on the Three
Guidelines is principally
through citations of
authoritative texts.

The Announcement of Kang,
Taijia, and Canon of Di are
all chapters in the Book of
Documents (see the
Glossary). The Taijia is a
lost chapter; the Canon of
Di is titled the Canon of Yao
in the received text.

On “Tian” (“Heaven”),
see the Glossary.








Tang was the Shang
Dynasty founder, c. 1600
BCE, well before the
invention of writing in
China. The text referred to
is unknown.



“The Poetry” refers to the
Book of Poetry. See the
Glossary.

The term junzi denotes a
Confucian ethical ideal: a
“prince” in terms of moral
worth. See the Glossary.





II.A.3 Commentary on “Coming to rest in the highest good”




The capital district a thousand li square;


The people dwelt therein.




Many the twittering orioles,


Coming to rest on the crest of the hill.

Confucius commented: “‘Coming to rest’ – they know where to
come to rest. Can we believe that human beings are not so good as
birds?”




So awesome was King Wen,


Coming to rest in the unquenchable gleam of reverence.


When acting as a ruler of men, come to rest in humanity. When
acting as a subject of a ruler, come to rest in reverence. When acting
as a man’s son, come to rest in filiality. When acting as a son’s
father, come to rest in kindness. When interacting with men of your
state, come to rest in faithfulness.




See the bend of the River Qi,


Thick bamboo so green;


A junzi there, so elegant,


As though cut and filed,


As though carved and polished.


Solemn – oh, exacting!


Formidable – oh, awesome!


A junzi there, so elegant,


Never can we forget him.

As though cut and filed: learned in the Dao. As though carved and
polished: he has refined his person. Solemn – oh, exacting: alert with
apprehension. Formidable – oh, awesome: awe-inspiring in manner.
Never can we forget him: this says that abundant virtue and greatest
goodness are things that the people can never forget.




Oh! We do not forget the former kings!




A li is a measure of
distance, roughly one-
third of a mile.





The phrase “coming to
rest” (literally, “to stop” or
“to stay”) is the same used
in the third Guideline.





King Wen (r. 1099-1050
BCE) was a predynastic
Zhou king who effected a
cultural transformation of
the Zhou people.

On the terms, “humanity”
and “filiality,” see the
Glossary.



The following two Poetry
citations do not appear
relevant to the third
Guideline. The Song
Dynasty philosopher Zhu
Xi (1130-1200) moved
them to this point in the
text, but it is not clear that
this is where they belong.


The text here interprets
the poem in ways relevant
to the program of The
Great Learning.















The junzi treats as wise those whom these kings would have treated
as wise, and cleaves to those whom they would have cleaved to. The
petty man delights in what they delighted in and takes as profit that
which they took as profit. Thus until the end of the ages they shall
never be forgotten.



II.B Commentary on the Eight Stages

II.B .1-2 Commentary on “Aligning affairs and extending
one’s understanding”

Confucius said,

In hearing lawsuits, I am no better than others. What is
imperative is to make it so that there are no lawsuits!

Not permitting those whose claims have no substance to exhaust
their explanations, acting in great awe of the will of the people. [This
is the meaning of “knowing the root.”] . . . This is the meaning of
“the extension of understanding.”

II.B.3 Commentary on “Making the intentions perfectly
genuine”

Making the intentions perfectly genuine means being without self-
deceit. It is the same as when we hate a bad odor or like a beautiful
color. It describes a process of perfect inner correspondence.

For this reason, a junzi is inevitably cautious of his solitude. The
small person will do bad things when at his ease; there is nothing he
may not do. When he is observed by a junzi, however, he will cover
up the bad things that he has done and exhibit any good ones. But
the junzi casts upon him a glance that sees through as to his very
lungs and liver – of what use is concealment? This is why it is said
that when one is perfectly genuine within it may be seen externally.
For this reason, a junzi is inevitably cautious of his solitude. Zengzi
said, “Ten eyes see and ten hands point: how austere!”

Wealth graces one’s home; virtue graces one’s person: when the
mind is broad the body is full. Therefore the junzi inevitably makes
his intentions perfectly genuine.
Comments on this and
the preceding poem both
concern the unforgettable
character of the sage. It
may be that they originally
belonged to a section of
the text where this theme
was a better fit – perhaps
a final section now lost.









The cited remark appears
as Analects 12.13.

The text is corrupt here.
The bracketed sentence,
appears duplicated from
Section I.B, and elements
of text have been lost.
The way this commentary
understands the first two
Stages is debated. See the
Glossary: “Aligning
affairs.”

“Perfectly genuine,”
renders a single key word
in the text; see the
Glossary.

The Great Learning uses
everyday examples to
convey key points. Our
immediate responses to
odors and colors illustrate
experiences of judgment
that admit no self-
deception, and this is how
it interprets “making
intentions genuine.”

Zengzi (Zeng Shen) was a
disciple of Confucius.











II.B.4 Commentary on “Balancing one’s mind”

Concerning the phrase, “refining one’s person lies in balancing one’s
mind”:

If one possesses anger and resentment one’s mind will not be fully
balanced. If one is in fear one’s mind will not be balanced. If one
takes pleasure in delights one’s mind will not be balanced. If one is
anxious and fretful one’s mind will not be balanced. When the mind
is not focused one does not see what one is looking at, hear what one
is listening to, or know the taste of the food one eats.

This is the meaning of the phrase, “refining one’s person lies in
balancing one’s mind.”

II.B.5 Commentary on “Refining one’s person”

Concerning the phrase, “aligning one’s household lies in refining
one’s person”:

When people come to those for whom they hold kinlike affection
they are partial. When they come to those whom they view as base
and evil they are partial. When they come to those whom they revere
with awe they are partial. When they come to those whom they pity
and feel sorrow for they are partial. When they come to those whom
they disdain and hold in contempt they are partial. Thus it is rare to
find in the world one who can love, but know the bad points of those
he loves, hate, but know the good points of those he hates. Thus the
saying goes,

None knows his children’s faults; none knows when his
seedlings have reached their limit.

This is the meaning of the phrase, “aligning one’s household lies in
refining one’s person.”

II.B.6 Commentary on “Aligning one’s household”

Concerning the phrase, “to order one’s state one must first align
one’s household”:

There are none who cannot instruct their households but can instruct
others. Hence the junzi perfects the teaching in his state without




The commentary takes
“balancing the mind” to
concern emotional calm
and focus. It uses
everyday experiences, such
as failing to notice what
one sees or the taste of
one’s food, to convey in
concrete terms what
balancing the mind
involves.







The phrase, “refining
one’s person” is broad
and vague. The
Commentary narrows its
meaning to issues of bias
and impartiality.



Again, concrete examples
are provided so readers
can grasp the point.


















One treats parents,
brothers, and children






leaving his household. Filiality is what one takes to serve one’s ruler.
The behavior of the younger brother is what one takes to serve one’s
elders. Kindness is what one takes to preside over the masses.

The Announcement of Kang says,

Be it like tending a newborn babe.

If one genuinely seeks the way to do so in one’s own mind, though
one may miss the mark, one will not be far off. There has never been
one who learned to raise a child before marrying.

When a single family is humane, humanity arises throughout the
state. When a single family practices deference, deference arises
throughout the state. When a single man is greedy and vicious, the
entire state is filled with chaos. Such are the triggers of things. As
they say, a single phrase can ruin an affair, a single man can set a
state right. Yao and Shun led the world with humanity and the people
accorded with it. Jie and Zhòu led the world with violence and the
people accorded with it – those kings’ commands were counter to
what they themselves loved to do and the people would not follow
them.

Thus the junzi seeks for things in others only once he possesses them
within himself, and forbids things in others only once he has no trace
of them in himself. Never has there been a person who has not stored
up within himself the disposition to treat others with reciprocity, but
who is able to persuade others to follow him.

Therefore, ordering the state lies in aligning one’s household.




The cherry tree with blossoms fresh,


And leafy branches flourishing.


This lady is off to be married,


May she make a good mate.

Only after there is a good mate may one instruct the people of one’s
state.




Elder and younger, fit brothers.

Only after one’s brothers are fit may one instruct the people of one’s
differently from rulers,
elders, and the masses,
but the skills are adapted
from the family context.
(“Kindness” translates a
term that connotes
parental love.)







This section on leading
by moral example seems
to break the flow of the
commentary here, and
may be inserted. It looks
ahead to the political
context of the final
section.

Yao and Shun are
exemplary sage kings of
the legendary past. Jie
and Zhòu are tyrants
whose wicked conduct
led to the overthrow of
their dynasties, the Xia
and the Shang.

“Reciprocity” denotes
the disposition to act by
the Golden Rule.


In the prior quote from
the Announcement of Kang,
parenting is a metaphor
for the first step of
learning how to care for
others; here, choosing a
good spouse or learning
to be one is a prior step
for gaining the authority
of social maturity.




Even before marriage,
preparation for leader-
ship begins among
siblings.






state.




With flawless aspect


Rectify the four states.

Only after those who act as fathers, sons, elder and younger brothers
are adequate to serve as exemplars will the people emulate them.

This is the meaning of the phrase, “to order one’s state one must first
align one’s household.”

II.B.7-8 Commentary on “Ordering one’s state and setting
the world at peace”

Concerning the phrase, “Setting the world at peace lies in ordering
the state”:

When the ruler treats the elderly as the elderly should be treated, the
people rise up with filiality. When the ruler treats those senior to him
as those senior to him should be treated the people rise up with
behavior fitting those who are younger. When the ruler treats the
orphaned with compassion the people do not turn their backs. Hence
the ruler fulfills the Dao of the carpenter’s square. That which you
detest in your superior, do not employ upon your subordinates. That
which you detest in your subordinates, do not employ to serve your
superior. That which you detest in those who are before you, do not
employ to lead those behind you. That which you detest in those who
are behind you, do not employ to follow those before you. That
which you detest in him on your right, do not employ when engaged
with him on your left. That which you detest in him on your left, do
not employ when engaged with him on your right. This is the Dao of
the carpenter’s square.




Happy the junzi!


Father and mother of the people.

To love what the people love and hate what the people hate – this is
to be the “father and mother of the people.”

















This final section,
commenting on the
public role of the junzi at
state and world levels,
draws on Confucian
political formulas.










The “Dao of the
carpenter’s square”
concerns “reciprocity,” a
Golden Rule formula:
“That which you do not
desire, do not do to
others” (Analects 15.24).









Loving and hating as all
people do is to be in
touch with natural moral
dispositions, as in loving
a beautiful color or hating
a bad smell (commentary
on Stage 3).








How tall is South Mountain!


Its boulders tower high.


Awe-inspiring is Marshal Yĭn,


The people all gaze upon him.

Those who rule a state cannot but be cautious; if they are partial,
they will be destroyed by all the world.




Before the Yin lost its peoples


It was a worthy match for the Lord on High.


We should view ourselves in light of the Yin –


The great Mandate is not an easy thing!

That is to say, if one gains the masses one gains the state; if one loses
the masses one loses the state.

Therefore the junzi is first cautious concerning virtue. If one has
virtue, one has men. If one has men, one has land. If one has land,
one has goods. If one has goods, one has means. Virtue is the root,
goods are the branches. If you take the root to be outer and the
branches to be inner then you will contest with the people over
distribution and expropriation. Thus it is that where goods are
concentrated, the people disperse. Where goods are dispersed, the
people concentrate. Thus it is that where words are proclaimed with
hostility, hostile words will be returned. Where wares are
expropriated with hostility, they will be seized back with hostility as
well.

The Announcement of Kang says,

The Mandate is not constant.

If one’s Dao is good one will receive it; if not, one will lose it.

The Book of Chu says,

There is no treasure in Chu; goodness alone is its treasure.

Jiu Fan said,

The exile has no treasure; his treasure lies in his humanity
and bonds to others.

The Oath of Qin says,

If there were only a minister who possessed this one ability



Marshal Yĭn was a
general of the Western
Zhou era. The lesson
drawn from him here
concerns maintaining
impartiality (Stage 4).

“Yin” is an alternative
name for the Shang
Dynasty. (There is no
connection with the
Marshal Yĭn in the poem
above.)

The “Mandate” is Tian’s
mandate for kings to
rule.

This echoes the Text
section on the Three
Guidelines: “Affairs have
their roots and branches,
situations have their
ends and beginnings. To
know what comes first
and what comes after is
to be near the Dao.”













The Book of Chu is a lost
text. Chu was a powerful
southern state.


Jiu Fan (Uncle Fan) was
the uncle of Duke Wen
of Jin (r. 636-628 BCE), a
storied ruler. Jiu Fan
advised the Duke with
great wisdom during a
long period of exile.






and no other: to be all excellent in mind and yet to be
accommodating of others – to view others’ abilities as
though they were his own, to love the sage words of others
with all his heart, almost as though they were uttered from
his own mouth – truly accommodating – to have such a
man to protect my descendants and my people – this would
be of the greatest benefit indeed!

One who views abilities with hate born of envy,
who discards the sage words of others and blocks them
from the ruler – truly without accommodation of others – to
have such a man to protect my descendants and my people
– this would be danger indeed!

Indeed, a man of humanity would banish such a one to the tribes of
the four quarters and refuse to allow him to dwell with them in the
central states. This is why it is said of the humane that only they can
cherish others and hate others. That one may see a worthy man and
be unable to raise him up, or raising him be unable to place him first:
this is fate. But that one should see a bad man and be unable to make
him retire, or having made him retire be unable to keep him at a
distance: this is to err. To love what others hate and hate what others
love is called acting counter to human nature: calamity shall
inevitably reach such a person.

The great Dao to becoming a junzi is this: inevitably, one gains it by
means of devotion and faithfulness, and loses it by means of
arrogance and extravagance. The great Dao that gives birth to plenty
is this: let the producers be many, let the consumers be few, let those
who craft be eager, let those who employ be easy. In this way, goods
will always be adequately plentiful. The humane employ wealth so
that the person will blossom; the inhumane employ the person so that
wealth will blossom. Never has there been a ruler who loves
humanity whose people do not love righteousness. Never has there
been one who loves righteousness whose affairs have not come to
completion. Never has there been one who could keep his
storehouses filled with goods not his own. Meng Xianzi said,

He who possesses horses and chariots does not inquire
into matters of raising chickens and pigs. The household
that has stored ice to chip does not raise dogs and sheep.
The household of a hundred chariots does not keep
servants to collect taxes – rather than harbor tax collectors,
better to harbor brigands.

This is to say that a state does not take profit as profit; it takes

The Oath of Qin is a
chapter of the Bok of
Documents.



























The “central states” are
those we consider
ancestral to China.






righteousness as profit. One who leads a state and concentrates on
goods is inevitably guided by small minded men and takes what they
do as a standard. If small men control a state in this way, calamities
and disasters will come; though there may be good men, the ruler
will not know how to use them. This is why it is said that a state does
not take profit as profit; it takes righteousness as profit.




















introduction to the doctrine of the mean

The Doctrine of the Mean is significantly longer and more complex than the Great Learning.
Zhu Xi distinguished thirty-three chapters in the originally undivided text, and these have been
preserved in this translation. However, Zhu’s divisions do not clarify the overall structure of the
text, and a set of section divisions have been added here in order to guide readers through the
shifting topical areas that The Doctrine of the Mean engages. In the case of one particularly long
chapter in Zhu’s classification (Chapter 20), a mid-chapter topic pivot is obscured by Zhu’s
arrangement, and for that chapter subsections have been added.
The title of the text is not without problems. Literally, it may mean, “the central ordinary-
practice,” or, perhaps, “bring centered in ordinary practice,” both somewhat puzzling ideas. The
notion of “ordinariness” is important to the text. One of its key points is that morality is a
characteristic feature of ordinary, everyday spontaneity, and that our ordinary experience, rather
than any elusive or esoteric wisdom, is the raw substance of the Dao. Interestingly, the word
glossed with the compound term “ordinary-practice” (yong ) is encountered in a related sense
in a key passage of the Zhuangzi chapter, “Seeing Things as Equal,” which reads, “Things cannot
have any completeness or impairment – all are in the final analysis comprehended as one. Only
the person of full attainment knows how to comprehend them as one. He affirms nothing as so.
His affirmation is lodged in ordinary practice. Ordinary practice means use; use is
comprehension; to comprehend is to grasp – once you grasp it you’re nearly there!” The
Zhuangzi claim is that by a readjustment of perspective, from one that seeks wisdom through
truth statements about what is so to one that is immersed in action without attachment to
assertions and denials of any kind, a person can both understand and act perfectly within the
dynamic flow of affairs. I believe that there is, in fact, a significant area of convergence on this
point between the Daoist ideas of the Zhuangzi and the very Confucian Doctrine of the Mean,
which seeks to unite the person with the creative flow of Nature – “heaven and earth” – through
an abiding sensitivity to the simple moral responses that pervade our daily lives, and that are the
focus of The Great Learning.


Structure of the text

It can be difficult to keep track of The Doctrine of the Mean’s underlying unity of theme. The
style of the text changes as it proceeds, moving from a form anchored around quotes from
Confucius, which dominates the first half of the text, to a succession of poetic celebrations of the
power of holistic wisdom to transform the human world and the cosmos. In providing a structural
framework for this translation, I have tried to convey my personal sense of the musicality of the
text. I do not mean to claim that the text is dominated by rhymed or metrically regular passages



that could have been set to music. I suggest music as a metaphor, drawing attention to the varied
textures of the “Doctrine’s” prosody, starting from the almost oracular drama of the opening
lines, and ending with the haunting calmness of its final section, which evokes its stated topic of
soundlessness. If there is a unity of underlying intellectual theme, it is conveyed through a
variety of prosodic dynamics that build towards a crescendo and then subside.

I have marked the opening chapter (that is, the text Zhu Xi identified as a unified initial
statement, which he labeled Chapter 1) as the “Theme.” The theme introduces a cluster of key
terms that play important roles throughout the text: Tian , our nature (xing ), the Dao (the
path or “Way” we are meant to travel in ethical action), the ideal moral character of the junzi
, and “centrality” (zhong ), or the mean. The message of the “Doctrine” concerns the way in
which a person can become a Sage by maintaining the centrality characteristic of the Dao and of
our Tian-endowed nature, and in so doing become the equal partner of heaven and earth. The
initial chapter ties these ideas together with the image of something beyond sight and sound that
we must search out. As we will discover at the end of the final chapter, which I have marked as
the “Coda,” this invisible and inaudible quality is possessed by both the junzi and the cosmos.
Commentators have tended to agree that the concept that corresponds to this elusive, linking
quality is cheng , a key term for the “Doctrine,” translated here by the awkward phrase,
“perfect genuineness.”
The first half of The Doctrine of the Mean takes us towards this concept in stages. In
Section I (Chapters 2-11), a string of quotes from Confucius tells us that the main obstacle to
following the Dao – the pathway – is not learning what it is, but the enormous effort of staying
on it. Its secret does not lie in “strange arts”; it lies in finding the persistence to walk it forever:
to be “centered” in ordinary practice until death. In Section II (Chapters 12-16) we learn that so
far from being a mystery, the Dao is actually present to ordinary people in ordinary practice.
These chapters reinforce the Mencian notion that every person is an incipient sage, and that it is
our common intuitions that we should seek guidance. Our journey on the Dao starts from
common experience, but by the end of the section, we see the junzi following the Dao to exalted
heights, and catch a glimpse of the invisible world of the spirits and the subtle quality of perfect
genuineness, manifestations of the invisible thread that binds all that Tian has destined for
human destiny. Section III (Chapters 17-19) reframes the greatness of the heroes of history – the
sage kings celebrated in all early Confucian texts – in terms of the most fundamental framework
of moral action: the ordinary practice of filiality, or obedient service to parents. Their world-
shaping accomplishments are represented as no more than the ultimate extension of filial service,
linking the moral life of every person to the unimaginable perfection of these sages.

Taken together, Sections I – III share a stress on the topic of the common root of all
moral practice, from the most ordinary, everyday action to the grandest political achievements.
The common farmer and his wife practice the Dao without knowing it (Chapter 12), and the



greatest sages are simply filial children, like all of us (Chapters 17-19). Section IV (Chapter 20,
parts (a) and (b)) begins with a break in the flow of the text. For the only time in the text, we hear
a personal voice other than the narrator’s or Confucius’s, that of Duke Ai of Lu, who asks about
the practical issue of governance. Section IV (a) is Confucius’s response, and his answer is that
the key to governance lies in placing in positions of power people who have grasped the Dao:
junzis. Giving virtue the lead is the way the world is set in order. A longer quotation from
Confucius follows (Section IV (b)), spelling out “nine canons” of governance. These are
something like a “Great Learning” for rulers, tracing the steps from self-perfection to perfecting
one’s relationship to an ever widening circle of people, until the entire world falls within your
circle of concern.
Section V (Chapter 20, part (c) through Chapter 26) is, in many ways, the climax of the
text as a whole. It begins with passages found in the Mencius, providing a transition from
political relationships back to a focus on the individual, where the root of all success is found in
the force of perfect genuineness. Genuineness is the theme of the entire section. It is pictured not
merely as a vector of moral understanding and action in people, endowed within them by Tian as
their distinguishing nature and as their intended destiny, it is the creative force of the cosmos
itself, a human expression of the teleological unfolding of the world of things and affairs. This is
where the text most clearly links the ethics of Mencius to the metaphysics of Xunzi, who saw the
birth of the human species as Tian’s final creative act: the generation of an independent sage
capacity which could complete the order of the cosmos and fulfill its destiny. Chapter 22 reads,
“Only those in the world who are perfectly genuine to the utmost can exhaust their natures.
Those who can exhaust their natures can exhaust others’ natures. Those who can exhaust others’
natures can exhaust the natures of things. Those who can exhaust the natures of things can
participate in the nurturing transformations of Tian. Those who can participate in the nurturing
transformations of Tian can form a triad with heaven and earth.” The outcome of acting as a
creative force on a par with Nature (forming a triad with heaven and earth: yu tiandi can
), a formula found repeatedly in the Xunzi, is here rooted in Mencius’s precept of exhausting
one’s nature (jin qi xing ).
Section VI (Chapters 27-29) translates this image of co-creation between heaven, earth,
and human beings to the social world, where its emblem is “ritual” (li ), that is, the networks
of human convention that sage creators elaborated as the enduring social expressions of human
nature. This too is a theme far more characteristic of Xunzi than Mencius. The Xunzi conveys a
similar notion in this phrasing: “In the heavens, nothing shines more brightly than the sun and
moon; on earth, nothing shines more brightly than water and fire; among objects, nothing shines
more brightly than pearls and jade; amidst humanity, nothing shines more brightly than ritual and
propriety.”
Section VII (Chapters 30-32) celebrates the sage who brings the three realms of heaven,



earth, and humankind together, praising first the former kings, whom Confucius took as models,
and then the general character of the sage, who is described as the apotheosis of humanity,
performing as a cosmic actor. The “Coda” (Chapter 33) closes the argument with a long string of
poetic passages, interpreted as invoking the invisible, transformative power of this cosmic sage.
These sectional divisions, listed below with Zhu Xi’s corresponding chapter divisions
indicated, are provisional and particular to this translation. They are not part of any commentarial
tradition, and are provided solely as guides to readers in following what seem to be the general
contours of the sustained argument of The Doctrine of the Mean.

Theme:
The source of the center (1)
Section I:
Cleaving to the central mean (2-11)
Section II:
The common basis of the Dao (12-16)
Section III:
Confucius on the sages and filial perfection (17-19)
Section IV:
On government (20 (a) and (b))
Section V:
Perfect genuineness (20 (c) – 26)
Section VI:
Ruling by the Dao of Nature and li (27-29)
Section VII: The sage’s power of virtue (30-32)
Coda:
The invisibility of ultimate greatness (33)










Theme: The source of the center

[1]
That which is ordained by Tian is called our nature; to lead by
our nature is called the Dao; to cultivate the Dao is called the
teaching.
One may not deviate from the Dao for so much as an instant;
that from which one may deviate is not the Dao.
Thus the junzi is alert and cautious about what he does not
see, is fearful about what he does not hear. Nothing is more visible
than the obscure, nothing is plainer than the subtle. Hence, the junzi
is cautious in his solitude.

Pleasure and anger, sorrow and joy: before they emerge they
are called centered; emerging by the proper rhythms they are called
harmonious. Centered: this is the great root of the world. Harmonious:
this is the ultimate Dao of the world. Reaching centered harmony,
heaven and earth take their proper places and the things of the world
are nurtured thereby.

Section I: Cleaving to the central mean

[2]
Confucius said, “The junzi keeps to the mean in action; the
small man reverses the mean in action. The mean of the junzi is such
that he is always exact in his timeliness; the reversal of the mean of
the small man is such that he will scruple at nothing.”

[3]
The Master said, “The mean in action is the ultimate! Few
among the people can long cleave to it.”

[4]
The Master said, “That the Dao will not be put into practice, I
know it. The wise go beyond it and the ignorant do not reach it. That
the Dao will not be made brilliant, I know it. The worthy go beyond
it and the unworthy do not reach it.
“No one does not eat, but few can know the taste.”

[5] The Master said, “The Dao is not put into practice.”

[6]
The Master said, “How great was the wisdom of Shun! Shun
[Theme]
The initial chapter
links human morality
to a source, Tian,
accessible to human
beings through their
moral dispositions, or
their “nature,” which
provides them direct
knowledge of the
dictates of ethical
action, expressed in
the Dao.

[1] On the terms
“ordained,” “Tian,”
“Dao,” and “junzi,”
see the Glossary.

Attention to the
invisible is a theme
that reemerges at the
close of the text.

The notion of a state
of human disposition
that exists prior to
the activity of life is
unusual, and stresses
the text’s link
between Tian and
human beings.

[Section I]
Chapters 2-11 all
consist of quotes
from Confucius.

[3] Analects 6.29:
“The Master said,
‘The mean in action
is where virtue
reaches its pinnacle.
Few among the
people long cleave to
it.’”

[4] Compare The
Great Learning :
“When the mind is
not focused one does
not . . . know the
taste of the food one
eats” (Commentary,
Stage 4).





loved to ask questions and loved to inquire into teachings near at
hand. He put evil in the shadow and raised up good. He grasped both
ends, but employed the center in ruling the people. Was this not
Shun!”

[7]
The Master said, “Men all say, ‘I am wise.’ Drive them into a
net or catch them tumbling into a trap; none knows how to evade
them!

“Men all say, ‘I am wise.’ But let them choose the mean in
action and none can keep to it for a round month!”

[8]
The Master said, “Hui was a man who, having chosen to
cleave to the mean in action, would clutch any point of goodness
tight in his fist, press it to his heart and never lose it.”

[9]
The Master said, “One may level all the states of the world,
decline high rank and salary, tread upon naked blades, and yet be
unable to cleave to the mean in ordinary practice.”

[10] Zilu asked about strength. The Master said, “The strength of
the South or the strength of the North? Or do you mean your type of
strength? Instructing through leniency, not responding in kind to
unjust acts: such is the strength of the South: the junzi dwells in this.
To sleep in one’s armor, to die unflinchingly: such is the strength of
the North: your type of strong man dwells in this.
“The junzi acts harmoniously but does not join in vulgarity –
the strength of the strong! He stands at the center and does not lean –
the strength of the strong! When the state possesses the Dao, he is
unchanged from when his way was blocked – the strength of the
strong! When the state is without the Dao, he remains unchanged
even though it means death – the strength of the strong!”

[11] The Master said, “Those who seek to live in hiding and
practice strange arts will still be spoken of in later ages, but I do not
do these things. A junzi may guide his way with respect to the Dao
and fall by the wayside midway, but I cannot cease. A junzi may
cleave to the mean in action by fleeing from the world, but to live
unknown and feel no regret is something only a sage can do.”

Section II: The common basis of the Dao

[12] The Dao of the junzi is broad yet hidden. Any husband or wife
may partake in knowledge of it, yet reaching to its ultimate nature,
[6] Shun was a
legendary ruler of the
distant past, often
cited as an example
of perfect sagehood.








[8] Yan Hui was the
disciple Confucius
regarded as being of
highest moral
attainment.

[9] The final clause ,
from “to cleave,”
simply translates the
two characters of the
text’s title, here used
as a verbal phrase
(“to ‘center’ in
practice.”)

[10] Zilu was
Confucius’s senior
disciple, known for
impetuous valor.



[11] Many early
Confucians withdrew
from political
engagement, but
those who chose
more fundamental
escape from society
are generally
associated with the
ideas of Daoism.
This passage pictures
the junzi as a lesser
ideal, in contrast to
the sage; see the
Glossary.

[Section II]
Texts in the Mencian
tradition picture the






there is that which even the sage does not know of it. Even an
unworthy husband or wife may practice of it, yet reaching to its
ultimate nature, there is that of it which even the sage cannot
practice. Heaven and earth are great indeed, yet there are still those
things which lead men to despair in them.
So it is that when the junzi speaks of what is great, there is
nothing in the world that can bear it up; yet when he speaks of what
is small, there is nothing in the world that can split it. The Poetry
says:



The kite flies high, striking the heavens;


The fish leap in the abyssal depths.

That is to say that both high and low are fully delved.

The Dao of the junzi forges its basis on the common husband
and wife; yet reaching to its ultimate nature, it delves into heaven
and earth.

[13] The Master said, “The Dao does not depart far from man. If a
man creates a dao that departs far from others, it cannot be taken as
the Dao. The Poetry says,




When cutting an axe handle,



The model is never far.

Say you hold an axe handle to cut an axe handle, but glance aside
when looking at the handle in your grasp: that would be to treat it as
a distant thing. The junzi governs humans by means of what is
human, and once they are reformed, he stops. Devotion and
reciprocity are not far from the Dao. If you would be unwilling to
have something done to you, do not do it to others.

“There are four aspects to the Dao of the junzi: not one am I
able to fulfill. To serve my father with that which I seek from my son
– I cannot do it! To serve my ruler with that seek from my
subordinates – I cannot do it! To serve my elders with that which I
seek from my juniors – I cannot do it! To first practice towards my
friends what I seek from them – I cannot do it!

“In the practice of common virtue, in exercising care in
normal speech, if you fall short, dare not fail to exert yourself; if you
overstep, do not carry on to the end. In speaking, look to your action.
In action, look towards your speech. How can a junzi fail to be ever
alert?”

[14] The junzi simply acts according to his position; he does not
long for what is outside of it. If he is naturally in a position of wealth
moral senses that
guide the greatest
sage as present in
every person.





[12] The Book of
Poetry is an early
anthology of verse,
celebrated as a classic
source of sage
wisdom by Confu-
cians. (See the
Glossary.) The
Doctrine of the Mean
cites from 18 of the
Poetry’s 305 odes.













[13] Devotion and
reciprocity (zhong
shu) are identified in
Analects 4.15 as the
unifying thread of
Confucius’s teaching.
The Golden Rule
maxim given here
appears as in Analects
15.24 as the formula
for reciprocity alone.
















and high status, he acts according to the norms of wealth and high
status. If he is naturally in a position of poverty and low status, he
acts according to the norms of poverty and low status. If he is
naturally placed among the nomad tribes, he acts according to the
norms of the nomad tribes. If he is naturally placed amidst confusion
and trouble, he acts as is appropriate for times of confusion and
trouble.
There is no situation in which the junzi is not fully self-
possessed. When in high position, do not be arrogant towards those
below. When in low position, do not prevail upon those above. Make
yourself upright and do not seek what you wish in others, then you
will encounter no resentments. Above, do not bear resentment
towards Tian; below do not blame men. Hence the junzi dwells in
what is simple, awaiting his destiny. The small man engages in
precipitous practices in search of a lucky fortune.

The Master said, “There is in archery that which resembles
the junzi. Should one miss the target, he seeks for the cause within
himself.”

[15] The Dao of the junzi may be compared to the saying that a
distant journey must begin from nearby, that a climb to great heights
must begin from below. The Poetry says:



Wife and children in loving concert,


Like zither strings all thrummed.


Brothers all in unison –


In happy harmony and joy.


How sound, your household!


Take joy in wife and offspring.

The Master said, “How these parents have acted in accord!”

[16] The Master said, “How abundant is the virtue of ghosts and
spirits! You look at them and do not see, listen to them and do not
hear, yet they inhabit affairs without exception. They make all the
people of the world fast and don ritual robes in offering up sacrifices.
Thrilling, how they seem to hover above, how they seem to be at
every side. The Poetry says,



The arrival of the spirits


Cannot be anticipated,


Much less may one be remiss.

The plain clarity of the subtle: in just this way perfect genuineness
cannot be obscured.








[14] Compare
Analects 14.35: “The
Master said, ‘Above,
I do not bear
resentment towards
Tian; below, I do
not blame men. I
study what is lowly
and so get through to
what is exalted. Is it
not Tian who
recognizes me?’”; see
also Mencius 2B.13.

On “awaiting
destiny,” see Mencius
7B.33; on “destiny,”
see the Glossary.





[15] The words for
“music” and “joy”
were, in ancient
times, homophones
represented by a
single written graph.

[16] The common
religion of early
China was ancestral
worship through
ritual sacrifice. The
spirits of the dead
were understood to
descend and partake
of the food and wine
(though they left
much unconsumed).

The term “genuine-
ness” is a keyword in
the text: see the
Glossary.







Section III: Confucius on the sages and filial perfection

[17] The Master said, “Did not Shun fulfill great filiality? His
virtue was that of a sage; he was exalted as the Son of Heaven; his
wealth was the possession of all within the four seas; his ancestors
were feasted by him at the clan shrines; and his descendants
protected them.
“Thus it is that great virtue inevitably gains its proper
position, inevitably gains its proper stipend, inevitably gains its
proper fame, inevitably gains its proper longevity. Thus it is that
when Tian gives birth to a thing it treats it with generosity according
to its potential. Hence when plants are cultivated they should be
nurtured, but when they lean askance, they should be cut down. The
Poetry says:



The junzi of great goodness,


How abundant his fine virtue!


Fit for the people, fit for all others,


He receives his stipend from Tian


Which protects and assists him with the Mandate


Extended from Tian.

Thus great virtue inevitably receives the mandate.”

[18]
The Master said, “Utterly without care: would this not
characterize King Wen? His father was King Ji; his son was King
Wu. His father initiated it; his son continued it.
“King Wu extended the thread from King Tai, King Ji, and
King Wen. As soon as he donned the clothes of war the world was
his. His brilliant fame in the world was never diminished, he was
exalted as the Son of Heaven, his wealth was the possession of all
within the four seas, his ancestors were feasted by him at the clan
shrines and his descendants protected them. In the end, King Wu
received the Mandate.

“The Duke of Zhou perfected the virtue of Wen and Wu. He
conferred posthumous royal titles on King Tai and King Ji, and in
sacrifices to the former lords he employed the rituals for the Son of
Heaven.
“This rule is then extended to the patrician lords, the
grandees, and the common people. If the father is a grandee and the
son a mere knight, bury the father as a grandee, sacrifice to him as a
knight. If the father is a knight and the son a grandee, bury the father
as a knight, sacrifice to him as a grandee. The mourning period of a
[Section III]
The three passages in
this section discuss
exemplary sages,
Shun and the revered
three founders of the
Zhou empire, in
terms of the way that
their accomplish-
ments as political
figures represent the
fulfillment of filial
responsibility.

[17] On filiality, see
the Glossary.

Shun was a legendary
sage ruler particularly
celebrated in the
Mencian tradition for
his filial virtue.



[18] The historical
exemplars in this
passage are all
connected with the
founding of the
Zhou royal lineage as
the dynastic ruling
house of China, after
its conquest of the
Shang Dynasty, in
1045 BCE. Kings Tai,
Ji, and Wen were all
lineal rulers of the
pre-conquest Zhou
people. King Wen’s
son, King Wu (r.
1049-1043) was the
first to rule over the
empire after the
conquest. Dying
young, his brother,
the Duke of Zhou,
ruled as regent for
the young heir and
completed a new
state design.

The new rule, confer-
ring higher status on






year is extended to all grandees. The mourning period of three years
applies to the Son of Heaven. But when mourning a parent, there are
no distinctions of rank: all are the same.”

[19] The Master said, “King Wu and the Duke of Zhou, were they
not of ultimate filiality! The filial son extends well the intentions of
his father and carries on his father’s affairs. In spring and autumn he
repairs the ancestral shrines, sets out the ancestral vessels, lays out
the ancestral robes, and offers up the food of the season.

“The rituals of the ancestral shrines are the means of ordering
the lines of descent, alternating the generations of zhao and mu. The
ordering of ritual ranks distinguishes the exalted from the humble. In
ordering the ceremonial affairs, distinctions reflect degrees of
worthiness. In the rituals of toasting, superiors toast inferiors,
extending the rites to the humble. In the closing banquet the white-
haired take the places of honor to represent ordering by age.

“To occupy his post, to carry out his rituals, to perform his
music, to respect what he honored, to love what he cherished, to treat
the dead as one treats the living, to treat the departed as one treats
those who remain: this is the ultimate of filiality.

“The suburban rite of sacrifice ministers to the Lord on High;
the rituals of the ancestral shrines minister to one’s forbears. He who
comprehends the rite of the suburban sacrifice or the meaning of the
great spring and autumn sacrifices can rule a state as though it lay in
his palm.”

Section IV: On government

[20](a) Duke Ai inquired about governing. The Master said, “The
governance of Kings Wen and Wu is laid out in the bound records.
When men such as these live, such governance is implemented; after
they die it withers away. It is the Dao of humankind to be quick at
government as the Dao of earth is to be quick at growing things.
Governments grow like rushes.

“The success of a government thus lies in the men it chooses.
In selecting men, judge by your own person. Refine your person by
means of the Dao. Refine the Dao by means of humanity.

“‘Humanity’ means ‘human’: cleaving to one’s kin is its
foremost element. ‘Right’ means ‘appropriate’: honoring the worthy
is its foremost element. The degrees that govern cleaving to one’s
kin and the ranks that govern honoring the worthy are the things that
give birth to ritual.

“Hence the junzi cannot fail to refine his person: intending to
the late father of a
newly eminent son, is
a function of the
filiality celebrated
here.






[19] Zhou clan
organization sorted
alternate generations
into lineage moieties,
called zhao and mu.
The practical
function is not well
understood.




The suburban rite
was an outdoor
sacrifice offered to
the high god,
variously called the
Lord on High (a
Shang term) and Tian
(a Zhou term).

[Section IV]
Chapter 20 is very
long and has multiple
themes. It is broken
into subsections here,
the first three
comprising a
discussion of the
Dao of governance.

[20/a] Duke Ai of
Lu reigned 494-465
BCE.

Mencian thought
prioritizes virtue in
people over
correctness of rules.

“Humanity” (ren )
and “human” (ren )
were cognate words.
Mencian thought






refine his person, he cannot fail to minister to his parents; intending
to minister to his parents, he cannot fail to understand others;
intending to understand others, he cannot fail to understand Tian.

“There are five things that extend throughout the world and
three means of practicing them: ruler and minister; father and son;
husband and wife; elder and younger brother; friend meeting friend.
These five form a universal Dao for the world. Wisdom, humanity,
valor: these three form the universal virtues for the world. There is
but a single means of putting them into practice.

“Some are born understanding it, some study to understand it,
some come to understand it only in circumstances of duress. But
once they understand it, they are all one. Some practice it through
natural ease, some practice it to benefit thereby, some practice it by
forcing themselves. But once they succeed by means of it, they are
all one.”

(b)
The Master said, “Loving learning is close to wisdom.
Assiduous practice is close to humanity. Knowing shame is close to
valor. He who knows these three things knows how to refine his
person. He who knows how to refine his person knows how to rule
others. He who knows how to rule others knows how to rule the
states of the world.

“There are nine canons for ruling the states of the world:
refine your person, honor the worthy, cleave to your kin, respect high
ministers, empathize with all officers, treat the common people as
your children, attract the skilled craftsmen, treat those distant from
you with gentleness, cherish the patrician lords.

“When your person is refined the Dao is established; when
you honor the worthy you become free from confusion; when you
cleave to your kin, your father, uncles, and brothers will have no
complaint against you; when you respect high ministers, you will not
be deceived; when you empathize with all your officers, gentlemen
will respond with great ritual courtesies; when you treat the common
people as your children, the people will be exhort one another; when
you attract the skilled craftsmen, you will have a sufficiency of
goods; when you treat those distant from you with gentleness, the
four quarters will flock to you; when you cherish the patrician lords,
then the world will be in awe of you.

“Fasting and purification, the ritual robes, no movement not in
accord with ritual: this is the means to purify your person. Ridding
yourself of flatterers and keeping sexual attractions at a distance,
treating goods as cheap and virtue as dear: this is the means to
encourage the worthy. Exalting their positions and providing
stressed that all
human beings had an
innate disposition to
be humane. “Right”
(or “righteousness”:
yi ) and “appro-
priate” were near
homophones. See the
Glossary.

















[20/b] This is a
formula for unified
rule over China. The
empire was divided
into many states,
ruled by “the
“patrician lords,”
after 771 BCE, until
reunification, first
under the Qin (221
BCE) and then the
Han (202 BCE) royal
houses. “Cherish the
patrician lords” may
be a prospective
prescript, if this text
was a Warring States
era product, or an
advisory comment to
one of the initial
Imperial era ruling
houses, if the text
was composed after
the Qin reunification.










generous emoluments, loving and hating as they love and hate: this is
the means to encourage your kin. Well staffed offices with adequate
responsibilities: this is the means to encourage high ministers.
Devotion and trustworthiness, generous emoluments: this is the
means to encourage gentlemen. Seasonable labor service and light
taxation: this is the means to encourage the common people. Daily
supervision and monthly reviews, provisions corresponding to
works, this is the means to encourage skilled craftsmen. Welcoming
them when they come and sending them off well when they depart,
with praise for their accomplishments and compassion for their
inabilities: this is the means to be gentle with those distant. Restoring
lines of broken succession and reviving abolished states, ordering
chaos and supporting those in danger, setting regular times for their
visits to court, asking they bring little when they come and sending
them off with much: this is the means of cherishing the patrician
lords.

“These are all the nine canons for ruling the states of the
world. There is but a single means of putting them all into practice.”

(c)
In all things, when plans are well laid, stand by them; when
they are not, discard them. When words are settled in advance there
is no stumbling. When affairs are settled in advance there are no tight
straits. When actions are settled in advance there is no flaw. When
the Dao is settled in advance it is inexhaustible.

Section V: Perfect genuineness

(d)
If those in inferior positions do not gain the trust of their
superiors, the people cannot be ruled. There is a Dao to gaining the
trust of superiors: if you are not faithful to friends, you will not gain
the trust of your superiors. There is a Dao to being faithful to friends:
if you are not obedient to your parents, you will not be faithful to
friends. There is a Dao to being obedient to your parents: if in
reflecting upon yourself you are not perfectly genuine, you will not
be obedient to your parents. There is a Dao to perfecting your
genuineness: if you are not clear about the good, you will not perfect
your genuineness.

(e)
Perfect genuineness is the Dao of Tian. Making things
perfectly genuine is the Dao of humankind.

One who is perfectly genuine hits the mark without effort,
succeeds without forethought. To keep to the center of the Dao at
perfect ease is to be a sage.










Under the Qin, all
patrician ruling
houses lost their
privileges, while the
Han rulers restored
many of them.
Confucians in each
era favored restoring
such houses.











[Section V]
The subject of this
section, “genuine-
ness” (see Glossary),
is often viewed as the
core of The Doctrine of
the Mean.

[20/d] This section
is close in language to
the major portion of
Mencius 4A.12 (and
see below).

[20/e] Compare this
to the latter portion
of Mencius 4A.12:
“Thus genuineness is
the Dao of Tian and
aspiring to genuine-
ness is the Dao of
man. There has never
been a man who has
been thoroughly







One who makes things perfectly genuine is one who chooses
the good and invariably grasps it tight.

(f)
Study broadly, inquire probingly, contemplate carefully,
distinguish clearly, practice sincerely.

If there remain things unstudied, do not act upon what you
have not mastered. If there remain things unprobed, do not act upon
what you do not understand. If there remain things uncontemplated,
do not act upon what you have not grasped. If there remain aspects
indistinct, do not act upon what is not clear to you. If there remain
aspects unpracticed, do not act upon what you cannot sincerely do.

When others can do one, demand that you do one hundred;
when others can do ten, demand that you do one thousand.

He who fully masters this Dao, though ignorant, shall surely
become enlightened, though weak, shall surely become strong.

[21] Spontaneously genuine in clarity: it is this that we refer to as
our nature. Spontaneously clarifying genuineness: it is this that we
refer to as the teaching. If one is perfectly genuine one will have
clarity. If one has clarity then one will be perfectly genuine.

[22] Only those in the world who are perfectly genuine to the
utmost can exhaust their natures. Those who can exhaust their
natures can exhaust others’ natures. Those who can exhaust others’
natures can exhaust the natures of things. Those who can exhaust the
natures of things can participate in the nurturing transformations of
Tian. Those who can participate in the nurturing transformations of
Tian can form a triad with heaven and earth.

[23] The next best is to master a single aspect. If one can perfect
genuineness in one aspect, that genuineness will appear in one’s
form; appearing in one’s form it will become plain; becoming plain it
will shine forth; shining forth it will move; moving it will
responsively change; responsively changing it will transform things.
Only those in the world who are perfectly genuine to the utmost can
transform things.

[24] Through the Dao of being perfectly genuine one may possess
foreknowledge. When a state is about to flourish, there must be
auspicious omens. When a state is about to perish, there must be
omens of its demise. Just as these omens become manifest through
milfoil and turtle shell, so for such a one they course through his four
limbs. When blessings or disasters are about to arrive, if it is good,
genuine yet been
unable to move
others; there has
never been a man
without genuineness
who has been able to
move others.”











[21] Clarity and
genuineness both
relate to morality.
Our innate moral
senses provide clear
ethical intuitions,
which teaching can
articulate. Perfect
genuineness aligns
action with those
senses effortlessly.

[22] The word
“exhaust” here
carries the sense of
“fulfill to the
utmost.”

[23] Compare
Mencius 7A.21: “What
the junzi takes as his
nature are humanity,
righteousness, ritual,
and wisdom. Rooted
in his heart, they
bloom richly in his
visage, course down
his back and through
his four limbs – he
moves unspeaking
and is understood.”

[24] Milfoil and
turtle shell were
instruments of
traditional divination.
The spirits reveal






he will surely know it first; if it is bad, he will surely know it first.
Hence one of utmost genuineness resembles the spirits..

[25] Perfect genuineness spontaneously completes things; the Dao
spontaneously guides them. Perfect genuineness is the cycle of
things ending and beginning anew. Without genuineness there would
be no things.

For this reason the junzi treats perfect genuineness as of
greatest value. Perfect genuineness is not merely the perfection of
oneself; it is the means of perfecting all things. Perfecting oneself is
humanity. Perfecting things is wisdom. It is the virtue of our nature
to conjoin the Dao of inner and outer; hence it is applied with the
appropriateness of timeliness.

[26] Hence the utmost of perfect genuineness never ceases. Never
ceasing, it endures. Enduring, it is manifest. Manifest, it reaches
distant. Reaching distant, it is broad and deep. Broad and deep, it is
high and bright. Broad and deep is that which bears all things. High
and bright is that which covers all things. Distant and enduring is
that which completes things. Broad and deep, complementing earth.
High and bright, complementing heaven. Distant and enduring:
without end.

One who is like this glimmers though unseen, changes though
unmoving, achieves though taking no action.
The Dao of heaven and earth may be thoroughly described in
a single phrase: As a thing, it possesses no duality, hence the way it
gives birth to things cannot be fathomed. The Dao of heaven and
earth is broad, is deep, is high, is bright, is distant, is enduring.
Now, heaven is but the composite of many tiny lights, but
when it extends to its endlessness, it suspends the sun, moon,
planets, and stars, and the world of things covered by it. Earth is but
the composite of many pinches of soil, but when it extends to its
breadth and depth, it carries the peaks of Hua and Yue upon it
without their being heavy, it bears the rivers and seas upon it without
their leaking away, and all the world of things is borne upon it. A
mountain is but the composite of many round stones, but as it grows
to its breadth and greatness, grasses and trees are born upon it, birds
and beasts dwell upon it, and precious jewels arise within it. A river
is but the composite of many dipperfuls of water, but as it reaches its
unfathomable depths, turtles and lizards, dragons and fish are born
within it, and goods are increased by sailing above it. The Poetry
says,

outcomes through
them mysteriously,
beyond the ken of
people. The insight
of the sage into the
unfolding of affairs is
similarly mysterious
to others.

[25] “Things” may
refer to objects or
affairs in the world:
human situations.















[26] The phrase
“taking no action”
(wuwei) is closely
associated with
Daoist texts, such as
the Dao de jing. It
appears once in the
Analects (15.5) to
denote the action of
the perfect ruler,
Shun, and it seems
both there and here
to represent a
targeted cooptation
of Daoist rhetoric.

Hua and Yue refer to
mountains in central
China.















The Mandate of Tian,


Oh, how endless!

Surely speaking of the manner in which Tian is heavenly.



Oh, glimmering!


The purity of King Wen’s virtue!

Surely meaning that the manner in which King Wen was patterned
lay in endless purity.

Section VI: Ruling by the Dao of Nature and ritual

[27]
How great is the Dao of the sage! Brimming, it nurtures the
things of the world, and towering, reaches the pole of heaven.
Enormous in its hugeness!

The ceremonies of ritual number three hundred and the
ceremonies of etiquette number three thousand: all await the right
man before they can be put into practice. Thus it is said, if one does
not extend virtue, the ultimate Dao will not coalesce therein.
Hence the junzi honors his virtuous nature and takes learning
as his Dao. He extends to the broadest expanse and exhausts the
essence of the minute. He reaches to the pole of the high and bright
and takes the mean in action as his Dao. He breathes warmth into the
old and understands the new, and is deeply sincere in his exaltation
of ritual. Thus when he occupies the superior role he is not arrogant,
and in the inferior role he is not insubordinate. When the state
possesses the Dao, his counsel can raise it up high. When the state
does not possess the Dao, his silence can accommodate it. The
Poetry says:



Both bright and shining,


So guarding his person.

Does it not mean precisely this?

[28] The Master said, “Ignorant yet fond of acting by his own
lights; of low station yet fond of relying only on himself; born in this
generation and returning to the Dao of old: disaster will surely reach
such as these.”

If one is not the Son of Heaven, one does not discuss matters
of ritual, one does not delineate a system of rules and measures, one
does not make assessments of patterns of culture.

In the world today, carts are built with axles of standard
length, texts are written in script of standard style, conduct is


Literally, “the
manner in which
Tian is Tian.”

King Wen’s post-
humous name. wen
, denoted the
patterns of civili-
zation expressed
through the many
forms of li: that is,
formal ritual and
ordinary social
ceremony, or
etiquette.

[Section VI]
Developing the
theme that closes
Chapter 26, which
linked Tian to the
patterns of civiliza-
tion, the focus now
shifts to the linkage
of nature and ritual.

[27] The great sage
kings of the past
were all conceived as
initiating new phases
of civilization
through the innova-
tion of ritual forms
that responded to the
times.

“He breathes
warmth . . .” Cf.
Analects 2.11, “A
person who breathes
warmth into the old
while understanding
the new is worthy to
take as a teacher.”

[28] The legitimacy
to innovate social
forms goes together
with the license Tian
grants when it
bestows the Mandate
to rule.







performed in roles of standard form.

Though one occupies the office, if one lacks the virtue, one
must not presume to innovate ritual and music. Though one
possesses the virtue, if one lacks the office, one must also not
presume to innovate ritual and music.
The Master said, “I can describe the ritual of the Xia, but the
state of Qĭ is insufficient to confirm them. I have studied the ritual of
the Yin, the state of Song preserves them. I have studied the ritual of
the Zhou, we now use them. And we follow the Zhou.”

[29] In ruling the world, if one attends to the three weighty
matters, one’s errors will be few. If the former rituals, though good,
lack confirmation, then lacking confirmation, they will not be
trusted, and not being trusted, the people will not follow them. If the
latter rituals, though good, are not honored, then in not being
honored, they will not be trusted, and in not being trusted, the people
will not follow them.

Thus the Dao of the junzi is rooted in his own person, confirmed
in the common people, assessed against the kings of the Three Eras,
all without flaw. When established within heaven and earth it is not
rejected. When put to examination by the ghosts and spirits it is not
doubted. If one could await its employment by a sage a hundred
generations hence, he could apply it and be without confusion.
“When put to examination by the ghosts and spirits it is not
doubted”: such is its understanding of Tian. “If one could await its
employment by a sage a hundred generations hence, he could apply
it and be without confusion”: such is its understanding of man.

Thus the motion of a junzi can be the Dao of the world for
every generation; his actions can be the model of the world for every
generation; his words can be the standard of the world for every
generation. Those from whom he is distant will gaze towards him;
those towards whom he draws near will never grow tired of him. The
Poetry says,



Over there none hate him,


Over here none weary of him,


Unceasing day and night,


Ever praising him to the end.

Never has there been a junzi who has failed to be like this, yet has
early earned praise in the world.



Unified measures and
script were innova-
tions of the Qin era
(221-208 BCE).



Xia, Yin (an
alternative name for
the Shang), and Zhou
are the dynasties of
the past (the “Three
Eras”); the descend-
ants of the Xia and
Shang lived in the
states of Qĭ and
Song. The comment
here is close to
Analects 3.9.

[29] It is not entirely
clear what the “three
weighty matters” are.
Zhu Xi took them to
be discussing (that is,
setting) matters of
ritual, delineating a
system of rules and
measures, and
making assessments
of patterns of culture,
three items men-
tioned in Chapter 28.















“Early” seems to be
used in the sense of
“prematurely.”









Section VII: The Tian-like virtue of the sage

[30] Confucius recounted Yao and Shun as ancestral, he
emblazoned Wen and Wu as regulating models. Above, they took the
seasons of heaven as rule; below, they accorded with the flow of the
waters and lands.

This may be compared to heaven and earth, nothing do they
fail to bear or to cover. This may be compared to the succession of
the four seasons, or the alternating brilliance of the sun and moon, or
the things of the world, which are nourished side by side and do not
harm one another.

Their Daos were walked side by side and were not
contradictory.

The powers of lesser virtue flow as in the current of a river;
the powers of great virtue deeply transform. This is the way in which
heaven and earth are great.

[31] Only the greatest sage in the world possesses the keen powers
of listening and seeing, penetration and wisdom that fit him to
approach men as a ruler; the magnanimity, generosity, gentleness,
and flexibility that fit him to accommodate others; the vigor,
strength, firmness, and resolution that fit him to take a firm grip; the
focus, seriousness, balance, and uprightness that fit him to be
reverent; the pattern, order, concentration, and incisiveness that fit
him to discriminate among different things. As arching vastness, as
depthless springs, he brings forth all this according to the times. As
arching vastness: he is like the heavens. As depthless springs: he is
like the deep. When he appears, none fail to respect him; when he
speaks, none fail to have faith in him; when he acts, none fail to be
content.

For this reason, his singing fame overflows the central states
and is carried forth even to the tribes of north and south. Wherever
boats or carts travel or human labor reaches, whatever heaven covers
or earth supports, wherever the sun and moon shine or frosts and
dews descend, none of blood and breath do not revere and cleave to
him. Hence, he is said to be the match of Tian.

[32] Only the most perfectly genuine man in all the world can
thread together all the great constant norms of the world, plant the
great
roots
of
the
world,
and
understand
the
nurturing
transformations of heaven and earth. How would he rely on any
other than himself? How sincere he is in his humanity! Depthless –
like the abyss! Vast – like Tian!

Apart from one who is keen of hearing and sight, sage in
wisdom, and fulfilled in Tian-like virtue, who could understand this?
[Section VII]
The chapters of
Section VI drew a
parallel between the
ritual form of the
ideal state and Tian;
now the parallel is
extended to the sage
himself.

[30] Yao and Shun
are, in Warring States
era Confucian legend,
civilization’s initial
kings. Wen and Wu
were the kings
credited with
delineating the
institutions of the
Zhou state.








































Coda: The invisibility of ultimate virtue

[33] The Poetry says,



Over the brocaded robes,


A plain dress.

She disliked displaying the patterns. Thus the Dao of the junzi is
hidden dark and grows brighter every day. The Dao of the small man
strikes the eye but fades every day. The Dao of the junzi is limpid,
and one never tires of it; simple yet patterned, gentle yet ordered.

He who knows that the distant shall be near, he who knows
that moral influence has a source, he who knows that subtle shall be
manifest – with such a one, you may enter into virtue. The Poetry
says,



Though they be submerged in concealment,


They are yet so plain to see.

Hence the junzi examines himself and is without flaw, with no evil in
his will. The manner in which the junzi surpasses others lies in what
others cannot see. The Poetry says,



Looking into your chambers,


Let there be nothing shameful even in the inmost corner.

Hence men respect the junzi though he does not act, have faith in
him though he has not spoken. The Poetry says,



Approaching without words,


And so without strife.

Hence the junzi persuades the people without issuing rewards; is
without anger, yet the people are awed as if by an axe. The Poetry
says,



Brilliant his virtue!


The many lords emulate him.

Hence the junzi is profoundly reverent, and the world is at peace.



I cherish bright virtue,


With no great sound or appearance.

The Master said, “Sound and appearance having nothing to do with
transforming the people.” The Poetry says,









Virtue light as a hair.
[Coda]
The verses of the
Book of Poetry were
intoned with musical
accompaniment, and
this final chapter may
be understood as a
semi-musical conclu-
sion of chant and
comment, singing the
praises of the sage as
a force of virtue
beyond the power of
sound or sight to
grasp.







Yet there remain things comparable to a hair.



The revolutions of heaven above


Possess neither sound nor smell.

That is the ultimate!