teach us the path / to the knowledge found within ourselves
2. In his body of perfected merit / displaying the
transformed and transforming / the joy of self–realization /
may the Buddha come to Lanka today
3. Buddhas of the past have appeared on Lanka /
accompanied by bodhisattvas of countless forms / pray
honor us with the peerless Dharma / every yaksha is
hoping to hear.”
Ravana, king of the yakshas, then sang gathas in the totaka
meter:
4. “After seven nights the Buddha has risen / from the
sea where leviathans dwell / from the palace of the Serpent
King, Sagara / happily he has come to this shore
5. And now that the Buddha has risen / I have come
with my apsara queen22 / with Shuka and Sarana23 / with
yakshas and learned men
6. Conveyed before the Buddha by an unseen force /
we dismount our flower-decked carts and bow / present
our names and offerings / and hope for the Bhagavan’s
blessing
7. I am Ravana who comes before you / the ten-
headed king of the yakshas / may the Buddha favor this
Lanka of mine / and all who dwell in its towns
8. Buddhas of the past within its cities / upon its
jewel-strewn peaks / spoke of what they themselves
attained / the realm of self–realization24
9. May the Bhagavan do so as well / together with
these sons of victors25 / the residents of Lanka and I would
listen / to his teaching of the purest Dharma
10. To the Lankavatara praised by past buddhas /

to what they themselves attained / the realm of self–
realization / unknown among other schools
11. I recall in previous ages / buddhas accompanied
by the sons of victors / recited this sutra out loud / may the
Bhagavan do so today
12. Buddhas in the future and the sons of victors /
they too will pity this yaksha assembly / they too will
ascend this jewel-decked summit / and teach this
profoundest of teachings
13. The city of Lanka is a city of wonders / adorned
with every known jewel / surrounded by lovely cool peaks
/ and shaded by canopies of pearls
14. The yakshas present today, Bhagavan / have
transcended desire and anger / they have honored buddhas
and looked within / and have urged each other to turn to
the Mahayana
15. Yaksha boys and girls as well / thirst to hear the
Mahayana / to the city of Lanka on Mount Malaya /
Bhagavan, come be our teacher
16. Kumbhakarna and his rakshasas26 / they also
dwell in this city / devotees of the Mahayana / they too
would learn about self–realization
17. Having honored buddhas with devotion in the
past / they hope to do so again / out of compassion, please
come / come with these sons of victors to Lanka
18. Mahamuni,27 accept my palace / together with its
apsara host / my crown and necklaces too / and my
delightful ashoka groves28
19. All I possess I give to the Buddha / and to these
sons of victors / there is nothing I would not give /

Mahamuni, have compassion on me.”
20. To this, the Lord of the Three Realms replied,29 /
”Ruler of the Yakshas / to this jeweled peak / the teachers
of the past have come
21. Out of compassion for you they have taught / the
way of self–realization / and on this jewel-adorned peak /
so shall they teach in the future
22. For this is where practitioners dwell30 / who
delight in that which is present31 / King of the Yakshas, you
have known / the compassion of sugatas and now shall
know mine.“32
23. Accepting this invitation / the Bhagavan stood
without speaking / Ravana then offered his chariot of
flowers / which the Buddha mounted and rode inside.
24. With his retinue Ravana followed / along with the
bodhisattvas / as the Buddha advanced toward the city /
apsaras sang and danced in his honor
25. Once the Buddha had passed through its gates /
to the reverent bows of the yaksha throng / joined by
Ravana and the yaksha men / and also the yaksha women
26. A group of yaksha boys and girls / presented the
Bhagavan with a net of pearls / while Ravana placed
strands of jewels / around the necks of the Victor and the
Victor’s sons
27. As the Buddha and the wise bodhisattvas /
acknowledged these offerings of jewels / each in turn
spoke in praise / of the fathomless realm of self–realization
28. Then Ravana and the yaksha throng / having
honored the best of teachers / asked and beseeched
Mahamati / who was known for requesting the Dharma

29. ”You have asked the Buddha before / concerning
the realm of self–realization / we yakshas and the
bodhisattvas present / come before you with this request
30. You are the most eloquent speaker / a devoted
practitioner too / thus we sincerely beseech the Master / to
ask the Buddha for this teaching
31. Free from the faults of other paths / of pratyeka-
buddhas and shravakas / the immaculate teaching realized
within / the teaching that leads to buddhahood.”
32. The Buddha thereupon conjured mountains /
peaks covered with jewels / beautiful scenes of every sort /
adorned with countless gems
33. And on each jewel-covered peak / the Buddha
could also be seen / and standing at his side / Ravana the
yaksha appeared
34. Also the entire assembly / was visible on each
summit / and in every land / another buddha was present
35. And together with the king of Lanka / its residents
appeared as well / inside their conjured cities / gazing upon
each other
36. Other things also appeared / the products of the
Buddha’s power / ashoka groves and sunlit forests / and
nothing in anyway different
37. And Mahamati on each peak / was asking on
behalf of the yaksha king / for the teaching of self–
realization / which the buddhas spoke in countless voices
38. And after they had spoken33 / these buddhas and
bodhisattvas vanished / only Ravana the yaksha remained /
standing inside his palace
39. He wondered what really happened / who spoke

just now and who listened / who saw and what was seen /
and where did those cities and buddhas go:
40. ”Where did those cities go / those radiant
buddhas, those sugatas / were they a dream or an illusion /
or were they the work of gandharvas34
41. Were they the result of cataract eyes / or was
what I saw a mirage / dream children of a barren woman /
the smoke and flames from a wheel of fire?
42. Such is the nature of things / the realm of nothing
but mind35 / this is something the foolish don’t know /
bewildered by false projections
43. There is no seer or anything seen / no speaker or
anything spoken / the appearance of buddhas and also
their teachings / are merely what we imagine
44. Those who view such things as real / they don’t
see the Buddha / nor do those who imagine nothing / only
those who transform their existence.“36
With this, the Lord of Lanka felt an awakening and
transformation of his consciousness, as he realized what
appeared was nothing but the perceptions of his own mind,37
and he found himself in a realm free from such projections. Due
to the stockpile of good karma from previous lives, he suddenly
gained an understanding of all teachings, the ability to see things
as they really are and not how others see them, how to examine
things with his own wisdom while remaining free from discursive
views, and all the abilities of a great yogin38 no longer dependent
on others: namely, how to manifest himself in various auspicious
forms, how to master all skillful means, how to know the nature
and characteristics of the stages of advancement, how to delight
in detachment from the self–existence of mind, will, and

conceptual consciousness,39 how to liberate himself from views
involving the three continuities,40 how to refute the arguments of
followers of other paths concerning causation, how to
understand buddhahood, self–realization, and the tathagata–
garbha,41 and how to live with the knowledge of a buddha.
Then from the sky and from within himself42 he heard a voice
say, “Well done, Lord of Lanka, well done. Practitioners should
practice as you have practiced. They should see tathagatas and
dharmas as you have seen them—any other way would be
nihilistic. They should examine things while remaining free from
the mind, the will, and conceptual consciousness. They should
look within and not be misled by external appearances or fall
prey to the doctrines, views, or meditations of shravakas,
pratyeka-buddhas, or followers of other paths. They should not
delight in idle or frivolous talk, or cling to the views of the
Vedas,43 or become attached to exercising power over others,
or indulge in such meditations as the six dhyanas.44
“This, Lord of Lanka, is the understanding of all great
practitioners, who thereby overcome false doctrines and refute
mistaken views, who eliminate attachment to a self, and who
make use of the subtlest wisdom to transform their
consciousness.45 This is the Mahayana path that leads to the
stage attained by buddhas. You should therefore devote yourself
to such an understanding.
“Lord of Lanka, this teaching will become clearer as you
become adept at cultivating samadhi and samapatti.46 But don’t
become attached to the realms cultivated by lesser practitioners
and followers of other paths or consider the states they imagine
as blissful. Followers of other paths cling to the belief in a self

and the view that the world is real and that material elements,
substances, and tendencies exist.47 Or they insist that ignorance
and the chain of causation are real. They make distinctions
where there is only emptiness. Lost in projections, they become
captives of the actors and actions of their own minds.
“Lord of Lanka, this teaching is the pinnacle of Mahayana
understanding, for it enables practitioners to achieve self–
realization and to enjoy higher levels of existence. Lord of
Lanka, through such understanding one removes obstructions
and calms the myriad waves of consciousness and no longer falls
prey to the views and practices of other paths. Lord of Lanka,
because followers of other paths cling to their belief in a self,
they become lost in dualistic views concerning the nature of
consciousness. Well done, Lord of Lanka. As you reflected just
now upon the meaning of seeing the tathagatas, this is how you
should view the Buddha.”
Ravana then thought to himself,48 “I wish I could see the
Bhagavan again. For the Bhagavan is the master of all those
forms of yoga that give rise to an inner realization free from
fabricator or fabrication and beyond the understanding of
followers of other paths. His is the knowledge realized by
yogins, and his is the experience of the bliss of samadhi, the
great bliss only attained through meditation.
“I wish by means of his miraculous powers I could see the
Compassionate One again, the one in whom the fuel of passion
and projection has been burned up, the one surrounded by the
sons of buddhas who is able to penetrate the thoughts of all
beings and travel to all places and know all dharmas without
showing any sign of effort. I wish I could see him so that I might
attain what I have not yet attained and not relinquish what I have

already attained and might advance to that realm marked by the
absence of projection and the great bliss of samadhi where
tathagatas dwell.”
Knowing that the Lord of Lanka had already attained the
forbearance of non–arising,49 out of compassion for the ten-
headed king, the Bhagavan once more appeared on the jewel-
adorned, pearl-shaded summit. And the Lord of Lanka once
more beheld all the glorious scenes that appeared earlier on the
peaks, including the buddhas, the arhats, the fully enlightened
ones with their thirty-two inspiring attributes,50 and with himself
and Mahamati standing before them on each peak while the
buddhas discoursed on the inner realization experienced by
tathagatas and while the yakshas surrounding them discussed the
language used to express this teaching. All this was witnessed by
the King.
The Bhagavan, too, saw all those assembled there, but by
means of his inner awareness, not his physical eye. Like a
yawning lion, he smiled a great smile. And he emitted rays of
light from the curl between his brows, from his sides and his
waist, from the swastika51 on his chest, and from every hair and
pore, a blazing radiance that resembled a world-destroying
conflagration, rainbows in the sky, or the sun at dawn.52 From
afar, Shakra and Brahma and the Four Guardians53 beheld the
Bhagavan sitting and smiling at the summit of Lanka, as if it were
Mount Sumeru.54 Together with the bodhisattvas in the
assembly, they all asked themselves: “Why is the Bhagavan, the
master of all dharmas, smiling like this and radiating light from his
body? And why is he sitting there without speaking, unmoved by
the bliss of samadhi or the self–realization of buddha knowledge,
and gazing like the king of beasts upon Ravana and concerned

with the progress of his practice?”
Mahamati Bodhisattva had previously agreed to Ravana’s
request out of compassion and knew the thoughts of the
bodhisattvas in the assembly. And he knew that because of their
delight in verbal instruction, beings in future ages might become
confused by their preference for words over meaning or by their
attachment to the practices of lesser paths or other teachings,
and they might wonder since the Tathagata had already
transcended the realm of consciousness why he was smiling such
a great smile. In anticipation of their curiosity, Mahamati asked
the Buddha, “What is the cause of such a smile?”55
The Buddha replied, “Excellent, Mahamati. It is excellent that
upon considering the true nature of the world and hoping to
awaken beings of the past, the present, and the future from
mistaken views, you have asked me about this. For a wise man
should ask questions, not only for his own benefit but also for
the benefit of others. Mahamati, Ravana, the Lord of Lanka, has
asked the tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones of the
past, a twofold question,56 which he now wishes to ask me.57
And because this teaching is not something those who follow
lesser paths or other teachings can understand, this ten-headed
yaksha shall also ask buddhas in the future.”
Aware that Ravana wished to question him, the Bhagavan
said, “Lord of Lanka, whatever you would ask, ask now, and I
will put an end to your doubts and replace them with joy, and
you will be able to see by means of wisdom, Lord of Lanka,
instead of projection. And you will be able to know the
practices appropriate for each stage and the way to attain the
truth of self–realization and the bliss of samadhi. And while in
samadhi, you will be protected by buddhas and will avoid the

mistakes cultivated by those of lesser paths. And while dwelling
in the unshakeable stage, the wisdom stage, and the dharma
cloud stage58 of the bodhisattva path, you will penetrate the
truth that all dharmas are without self–existence,59 and you will
find yourself seated upon a giant, jeweled lotus flower, where
you will enter countless samadhis and be instructed by buddhas.
“Lord of Lanka, as you see yourself seated upon this giant,
jeweled lotus flower supported by the power of the buddhas,
you will be surrounded by countless bodhisattvas also seated on
lotus flowers, and all of them will be gazing upon you. This is an
indescribable realm. And it is by cultivating the efficacious prac–
tices of the various stages of this path that you will be able to see
this indescribable realm and thereby experience the infinite
characteristics of the tathagata stage, which is something that has
never been witnessed by followers of lesser paths or other
teachings, not even by Brahma, Shakra, or the Four Guardians.”
As the Buddha spoke, the Lord of Lanka rose to his feet and
proceeded to cover the peak with a myriad of flawless jeweled
lotuses, while a host of celestial maidens accompanied him
bearing multicolored garlands, flowers of every kind and hue,
incense and fragrances of every sort, jeweled banners, flowered
umbrellas, and colored flags and wearing necklaces of varying
lengths, jeweled caps, and filigreed tiaras and all sorts of
beautiful attire, the splendor and rarity of which had never been
known, much less seen. He also conjured a canopy of pearls
and countless jeweled banners above the Buddha and the
bodhisattvas and musical instruments surpassing anything that
existed among the devas, nagas, yakshas, gandharvas, asuras,
kinnaras, mahoragas,60 humans and non-humans in the realm of
desire as well as instruments from buddhalands throughout the

ten directions.
After he had done all this, King Ravana suddenly rose in the
air to a height equal to more than seven palm trees.61 And as he
stood there in space, all kinds of musical instruments, flowers,
perfumes, and garments rained down and filled the sky, which he
then used as offerings to the Buddha and the bodhisattvas. And
once he had presented his offerings, he descended from the sky
and seated himself upon an adjacent jewel-covered peak that
was also adorned with giant, jeweled lotuses as bright as the sun
or lightning.
Once the Buddha saw that Ravana was seated, he smiled and
waited for him to present his twofold question. King Ravana
then asked: “Bhagavan, I have asked the tathagatas, the arhats,
the fully enlightened ones in the past about the two kinds of
dharmas, and they have answered. I am now asking again in
hopes that the Bhagavan might explain the meaning of their
words.62
“Bhagavan, I have been instructed in the two kinds of
dharmas by apparition buddhas but not by the primordial
buddhas.63 The primordial buddhas cultivate the bliss of
samadhi and do not speak about realms imagined by the mind.
Most Honored One, as the Tathagata is a master of all dharmas,
I hope the Bhagavan, the Arhat, the Fully Enlightened One will
now explain these two kinds of dharmas about which these sons
of buddhas and I wish to hear.”
The Buddha replied, “Then ask, Lord of Lanka, about these
two kinds of dharmas.”
The king of the yakshas then rearranged the jeweled crown
and necklaces and other ornaments that graced his body and
said, “The Tathagata has said that dharmas should be

abandoned, and non-dharmas even more so.64 Bhagavan, what
do you mean when you say we should abandon these two kinds
of dharmas? Bhagavan, what constitutes a dharma? And what
constitutes a non-dharma? And if we should abandon
something, why these two? Wouldn’t this result in projecting the
existence of something or the nonexistence of something,
something that is real and something that is not real? If all we do
is give rise to projections, instead of the undifferentiated
characteristics of our repository consciousness,65 we will behold
strands of hair in the sky66 and realms of impure knowledge.
Bhagavan, if this is the nature of dharmas, how are we to
abandon them?”
The Buddha replied, “Lord of Lanka, you see how ignorant
people distinguish things, things as fragile and impermanent as a
clay pot, do you not? The distinctions among dharmas and non–
dharmas67 are the projections of foolish people and not how
things are viewed according to buddha knowledge.68 Lord of
Lanka, foolish people see things in terms of characteristics, not
the wise.
“Lord of Lanka, fire is seen as something uniform, but when it
destroys such things as buildings or trees, its flames are
distinguished depending on the shape and size of the material
that burns. Why don’t you see that dharmas and non-dharmas
are distinguished the same way—just as a fire is seen as a
singular continuity or as a diversity of flames?69 Or consider the
continuity of a seed, Lord of Lanka, as it gives rise to such
varying forms as sprouts, stems, joints, branches, leaves, buds,
flowers, and fruits.70 And as with external objects, the same is
true of internal objects, whereby ignorance gives rise to such

dharmas as skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas71 as well as to the
varieties of existence in the three realms and to differences in
terms of suffering and joy, good and evil, speech and silence.
So, too, consciousness and its objects are the same but differ
depending on distinctions as to which is superior, neutral or
inferior, defiled or pure, good or bad. Not only are there
distinctions among such things as these, Lord of Lanka, when
yogins practice meditation, the characteristics of their internal
realms are also marked by differences. How much more then
are dharmas and non-dharmas marked by a multitude of
distinctions? Thus, Lord of Lanka, the different characteristics of
dharmas and non-dharmas are the result of projection.72
“What, then, Lord of Lanka, is a dharma? A dharma is
whatever ordinary people and followers of lesser and heterodox
paths imagine. Basically, they think a dharma has existence and
substance and arises from causes. Such things must be
abandoned and avoided.73 Don’t engage in the projection of
appearances or become attached to what are perceptions of
your own mind. The things people grasp, such as clay pots, lack
any real substance. To view dharmas like this is to abandon
them.
“And what, Lord of Lanka, is a non-dharma?74 This refers to
what has no discernible body of its own, what has no
distinguishable characteristics, what is not subject to causation,
and what offers no basis for views of its existence or
nonexistence. Therefore, it is also to be abandoned. Non-
dharmas are things like horns on a rabbit, an ass, a camel, or a
horse or the offspring of a barren woman. Such things lack any
form or appearance and cannot be perceived. They are merely
names talked about according to convention. They are not things

that can be grasped, like a clay pot. And just as what is
discriminated as existing should be abandoned, what cannot be
known by any form of consciousness should also be abandoned.
This is why I say to abandon dharmas and non-dharmas. Lord
of Lanka, I have answered what you have asked.
“Lord of Lanka, you say you have asked the tathagatas, the
arhats, the fully enlightened ones about this in the past, and they
have also answered you. Lord of Lanka, what you call the past
is, by another name, a projection. And just as the past is a
projection, so are the future and the present. Lord of Lanka, the
tathagatas do not project what amounts to reality.75 They
transcend projection and fabrication76 and do not go along with
distinguishing forms, except to instruct or to pacify the ignorant.
It is by means of such wisdom that tathagatas practice a
formless practice. Thus, tathagatas consider knowledge as their
real body. And because they consider knowledge as their real
body, they are free from projection or anything that projects,
such as a self, a life, or a person or any kind of consciousness
that gives rise to forms dependent on an objective world. Thus,
they are free from what projects and what is projected.
“Lord of Lanka, the appearances of beings are like paintings:
they are not conscious and not subject to karma.77 The same is
true of dharmas and non-dharmas. There is no one who speaks,
nor is there anyone who hears. Lord of Lanka, everything in the
world is like an illusion. This is beyond the understanding of
ignorant beings and the followers of other paths. Lord of Lanka,
to see things like this is to see them as they really are. To see
otherwise is to see them as they are not, to engage in projection,
and to become attached to these two kinds of dharmas. Lord of
Lanka, this is like seeing an image in a mirror or a reflection in

water or like seeing a figure in the moonlight or a shadow on a
wall or like hearing an echo in a valley. People attached to the
images of their own projections cling to dharmas and non-
dharmas. Unable to abandon them, they continue to engage in
projection and fail to attain tranquility. Tranquility means
oneness,78 and oneness means the tathagata-garbha, the realm
of self–realization of buddha knowledge, from which the
supreme samadhi arises.”79
1 Although we have no early copies of the Sanskrit text of this
sutra, those that we do have divide the text into ten chapters—
with the tenth chapter being a collection of gathas to which
Nanjio Bunyiu gave the title: Sagathakam (Verse Anthology).
The same ten-chapter division was also used by Shikshananda
but not by Bodhiruchi, who divided his translation into eighteen
chapters, and not by Gunabhadra, who divided his translation
(minus this first chapter, the Dharani, and the Sagathakam)
into four parts, all with the title: “The Heart of the Teaching of
Buddhas.” The further division into sections was the work of
subsequent commentators, and a number of variations exist.
Rather than introduce a new set of section divisions and in order
to make comparisons easier, I have followed those of Suzuki,
whose sections were based on those of the Japanese monk,
Kokan Shiren (1278–1346). However, I have combined
chapters Four through Eight into a single chapter, and, unlike
Suzuki, I have numbered verses separately for each section
rather than for each chapter.
2 Chapter One. In this first chapter, as the Buddha reappears
from the palace of the serpent king, Ravana asks for instruction
about dharmas, the constituents of reality as perceived and
understood by those who divide the world or their own

awareness into parts, and non-dharmas, the creations of our
imagination. The Buddha responds with the manifestation of a
fun house of illusion, a monumental smile and light, and finally a
few words to point Ravana past dharmas and non-dharmas
back to his own undifferentiated and undifferentiating mind.
3 As in other Buddhist sutras, the presumed speaker is Ananda,
the Buddha’s cousin and personal attendant, whose unfailing
memory formed the basis for the initial compilation of
Shakyamuni’s sermons at the First Council, held in 383 B.C.
shortly after the Buddha’s Nirvana.
4 Lanka refers to the island of Sri Lanka (Holy Lanka).
5 Maha means “great,” and mati (from the root man) means
“mind.” Thus, maha-mati means “great-minded” or “wise,” and
the term was applied to those noted for their wisdom. Thus,
Mahamati represents all those who cultivate wisdom. Mahamati
is also the name for the planet Jupiter. The appellation
“mahasattva” was applied to lions and also to human heroes
who shared the fearlessness of lions. It is usually translated as
“great being,” but “fearless” comes closer. In the interests of
simplicity, I have decided to omit mahasattva from its
subsequent appearances, but readers can assume its presence
after most instances of the word “bodhisattva.”
6 The Sanskrit is sva–citta–drshya (perceptions of one’s own
mind). This is one of the two main threads that runs through this
sutra, the other being variations of pratyatma–gati (personal
realization).
7 Among the concepts used in this sutra to explain how the mind
works and how we (mis-)perceive reality are the five dharmas:
appearance, name, projection, correct knowledge, and
suchness; the three modes of reality: imagined, dependent, and

perfected; the eight forms of consciousness: one for each of the
six senses—the sixth being conceptual consciousness, a seventh
for self- identity and reasoning, and an eighth for storing and
distributing the seeds from the habit-energy left behind by the
operations of the sixth and seventh forms of consciousness; and
two kinds of no-self: the denial of self-existence concerning
animate and inanimate objects. For the last phrase, (and I have
followed Gunabhadra’s Chinese translation up to the end of this
paragraph) the Sanskrit has nairatmya–advaya, “non-self and
non-duality.” For the relationships among these various
concepts, see sections LXXXIII & LXXXIV.
8 With this paragraph, extant Sanskrit texts and the Chinese
translations of Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda begin a chapter-
long account of the Buddha’s discourse to Ravana, the ruler of
Lanka and chief of the yakshas who inhabited this island. None
of this appears in Gunabhadra’s translation. But rather than
place it in an appendix, I’ve decided it fits better here, especially
as it serves to introduce the teaching that follows. Although my
translation of the rest of this chapter is based for the most part
on the Sanskrit, I have sometimes chosen to follow the Chinese
of Bodhiruchi and/or Shikshananda. In cases where such a
choice results in a significantly different reading, I have
mentioned this in my notes.
9 The Sanskrit for “serpent-king” is naga–raja. In ancient
India, as in other early civilizations, serpents were viewed as
guardians of knowledge, and buddha knowledge, or arya–
jnana, is the goal of the practice taught in this sutra. Sagara was
one of eight serpent kings who acted as protectors of the
Dharma in ancient India. His residence was at the bottom of the
ocean, and there are two sutras in the Tripitaka addressed to

him (Taisho 598 and 599), the first of which was extant as early
as A.D. 300.
10 Shakra is chief among gods. Brahma is creator of the
universe.
11 Malaya is a not-so-veiled reference to the eighth form of
consciousness, or alaya–vijnana.
12 The Sanskrit is sva–pratyatma–arya–jnana. The personal
experience of what buddhas know is the second of this sutra’s
principle teachings. This phrase also appears at the very end of
this chapter.
13 Two categories of Hinayana Buddhists devoted to self-
liberation and the attainment of nirvana, as opposed to the
liberation of all beings and the attainment of enlightenment that
characterizes Mahayana Buddhism.
14 Ravana was the ten-headed king of Lanka. His name means
“He of the Terrifying Roar,” referring to his screams of agony
while pinned under a mountain by Shiva. He is still reviled in
India for his abduction of the wife of Rama. The yakshas were
one of the tribes of ancient India and were demonized along with
their king.
15 In this sutra, the mind is viewed as the repository of what
remains from all the images we have previously projected upon
an “external” world as well as upon an “internal” world and also
the source of subsequent projections. Bodhiruchi alone
attributes the perception of thoughts here to the Buddha, rather
than to Ravana. Still, it is by the power of the Buddha that
Ravana sees such thoughts and sees them in a way that agrees
with the underlying metaphor of the mind as an ocean and
thoughts as its waves.
16 The clockwise circumambulation of a holy person or place

was an ancient way of showing respect in India.
17 Vaidurya, aquamarine, a blue form of beryl. After gold and
silver, this was the most precious of the sapta–ratna, or “seven
jewels.” It was later replaced by lapis lazuli, which was far
cheaper and easier to obtain.
18 A poetic form usually consisting of quatrains.
19 Grama and murchana are the names of the two earliest
known modes or scales of Indian music. The Sanskrit text
includes the names of six of their seven keys: saharshya,
rishabha, gandhara, dhavata, nishada, and madhyama. That level
of detail, however, is only present in the Sanskrit, hence I’ve
decided to follow the Chinese in this case.
20 A raga played in the morning in praise of deities.
21 A poetic form of twelve-syllable lines consisting of four
identical three-syllable feet. However, the Sanskrit text of the
gathas that follow is no longer in the totaka meter, assuming it
was originally.
22 Celestial females known for their beauty and grace and also
their skill as dancers.
23 Counselors of Ravana who once disguised themselves as
monkeys to spy on Rama.
24 The Sanskrit is pratyatma–gati–gocaram, where gocara
(pasture) refers to a perceptual field and/or the objects within
that field, while pratyatma–gati means “personally realized.”
25 Here and elsewhere, this expression refers to bodhisattvas.
The Sanskrit is jina–putra.
26 Brother of Ravana. Like the yakshas, the rakshasas were
among the ancient tribes of India. The two were related and
often confused.
27 An epithet of the Buddha meaning “Great Sage.”

28 In Sanskrit ashoka means “free from sorrow.” It is also the
name of the Sac–raca asoca, known for its dense green foliage
and for its fragrant orange flowers that bloom in March and
April.
29 The three realms are those of desire, form, and formlessness.
30 The reference here is both to those who dwell on Lanka as
well as to those who practice self-realization.
31 The Sanskrit is drshta–dharma–sukha. This phrase will
make its appearance again, but not until sections LXXXII and
LXXXIII.
32 Another epithet of buddhas, sugata means “well gone.”
33 According to both Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda.
34 The male counterparts of apsaras, gandharvas were
guardians of soma, a hallucinogenic concoction used by priests.
They were also skilled musicians who lived in the sky. Hence, to
refer to their cloud homes was tantamount to referring to an
illusion.
35 It should be clear from this and the foregoing that the
teaching Ravana would hear is not that of “mind-only,” which he
already understands, or thinks he understands, but that of
personal realization, which distinguishes this sutra from all others.
36 The Sanskrit is paravrtti–bhave, where paravrtti means
“to overturn” and bhave means “existence.” In the Diamond
Sutra (5), the Buddha says: “Since the possession of attributes
is an illusion, Subhuti, and no possession of attributes is no
illusion, by means of attributes that are no attributes the
Tathagata can, indeed, be seen.” The third line refers to those
whose meditative state is such that it no longer gives rise to
thoughts.
37 Along with the personal realization of buddha knowledge,

this is the other thread that runs through this sutra, the teaching
known as “mind-only,” that what we perceive is nothing but our
own minds: sva–citta–drshya–matra.
38 This sutra is clearly addressed to an audience familiar with
the yoga teachings of the time, as can be inferred by the
appearance of such terms as this. Elsewhere, I have tended to
translate this term as “practitioner” to avoid association with any
specific tradition.
39 This is my standard rendering for citta–manas–mano–
vijnana. By citta (mind) is meant the eighth, or repository,
consciousness; by manas (will) is meant the seventh
consciousness, which is also called “self-consciousness;” and by
mano–vijnana (conceptual consciousness) is meant the sixth
consciousness, which reifies the five sensory-based forms of
consciousness into conceptual constructs. In the Lankavatara,
conceptual consciousness is viewed as the root of
misunderstanding. In other texts, the will is its source. It should
be noted, however, that in the Lankavatara, this compound
sometimes means simply “mind and consciousness.”
40 In Section LXVIII, the Buddha lists the three continuities, or
tri–samtati, as greed, anger, and delusion, which elsewhere are
known as the “three poisons.”
41 The womb of buddhas. The mind purified. The repository
consciousness (alaya–vijnana) transformed.
42 I’ve followed Bodhiruchi. Shikshananda has “from the sky
and from within the palace,” and the Sanskrit has simply “from
the sky.”
43 The Vedas refer to the scriptures of the Brahmans. This is not
present in the Sanskrit, which has instead: “Do not accept views
concerning self-existence.” It is, however, present in Bodhiruchi

and Shikshananda.
44 The reference is to meditations aimed at acquiring the six
powers.
45 Again, paravrtti (overturning/transforming). But here the
object is vijnana (consciousness), instead of bhave (existence)
or ashrya (basis).
46 These two terms are often used synonymously for the deeper
states of meditation. When they are distinguished, samadhi
refers to a wide range of specific meditations, while samapatti
refers to the four formless meditations or to the combination of
stillness and contemplation.
47 The Lokayatas believed the world was composed of the four
material elements of solidity (earth), moisture (water), warmth
(fire), and movement (wind); the Sarvastivadins believed in an
underlying substance that survived change; and the Samkhyas
believed in the tendencies (gunas) of creation, stasis, and
destruction that combined to form reality.
48 Ravana hears the foregoing and knows it is spoken by the
Buddha but does not see him.
49 The Sanskrit is anutpattika–dharma–kshanti. The
attainment of this realization—that nothing has arisen, now
arises, or will arise—marks the eighth and essentially final stage
of the bodhisattva path, as the ninth and tenth stages are “where
tathagatas dwell.” While the Sanskrit specifies that Ravana had
already attained such a realization, both Bodhiruchi and
Shikshananda have variations of “would soon attain.” However,
in the following pages, the Buddha describes Ravana’s future
ascent from the unshakeable (eighth) stage to the dharma cloud
or tathagata (tenth) stage. Hence, it would seem reasonable that
he had already reached the eighth stage.

50 The bodies of buddhas are said to be marked by thirty-two
attributes, such as long arms and ear lobes, a curl in the middle
of the forehead, a swastika in the middle of the chest, etc.
51 This ancient symbol of unknown origin is also referred to as a
shrivatsa. It often appears as a white curl in the middle of the
chest of a buddha or one of the Hindu gods, such as Vishnu.
52 A similar display of light coming from the Buddha’s body
occurred prior to his ascension to the Tryantrinsha Heaven to
teach his mother the abhidharma. Added to this display, the
Buddha’s smile distinguishes this teaching with one of the
hallmarks of Zen.
53 The Four Guardians are protectors of the Dharma. Their
statues line the entryway to most Buddhist monasteries in East
Asia.
54 Mount Sumeru (or Mount Meru) occupies the center of the
Buddhist universe. This is not an idle comparison. According to
early Hindu legends, Sumeru’s summit was blown off and fell
into the sea to form the island of Lanka.
55 The traditional genesis of Zen goes back to the day when the
Buddha held up a flower, and Kashyapa smiled. Here, though,
the Buddha smiles.
56 The Sanskrit is prashnadvayam prshtavan (to ask a pair of
questions). From what follows, we can see that these refer to
dharmas and non-dharmas (adharma), both of which, as the
Buddha explains below, are projections or fabrications and
should be abandoned.
57 To this, the Sanskrit adds, “for he wants to know how they
differ, how they are constituted, and what they determine.”
58 These are the eighth, ninth, and tenth bhumis, or stages, of
the bodhisattva path: the acala, sadhu-mati, and dharma-

megha bhumi. In addition, the Lankavatara also mentions a
tathagata bhumi, or tathagata stage. Some commentators think
this is meant as an eleventh stage. I suggest it is simply another
name for the tenth stage.
59 The remaining lines of this paragraph and the entirety of the
next are absent in Shikshananda and are not clear in the
Sanskrit. I have followed Bodhiruchi.
60 Kinnaras were half–human and half–horse, while mahoragas
were serpents.
61 The tala, or palmyra palm, grows to heights of more than
sixty feet. In ancient India, its fan-shaped leaves supplied early
Buddhists with the material on which their scriptures were first
written.
62 This reminds me of Groundhog Day. Ravana has asked
before, and the buddhas of the past have explained that all
dharmas are fictions—be they dharmas or non-dharmas. And
apparently he will be asking about this in the future.
63 Both Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda have ken–pen–ju–lai
(primordial buddhas), a term unique to this sutra. Elsewhere, this
sutra presents an early version of the three bodies of every
buddha: the body in which a buddha appears to others, the
body in which a buddha attains and enjoys the bliss of
realization, and a buddha’s real body, which is the teaching—or,
as this sutra would have it, the knowledge of this teaching.
Instead of “primordial buddhas,” Suzuki has “tathagatas of
silence,” which apparently stems from reading the Sanskrit
mauna (silent) instead of maula (ancient).
64 The Buddha says this in Chapter Seven of the Diamond
Sutra, among other places.
65 In its undifferentiated state, the repository consciousness, or

alaya–vijnana, is known as the tathagata–garbha, or womb
of buddhas. The former represents the defiled mind, the latter
the mind purified. For buddhas, they are one and the same. For
the rest of us, they are different.
66 The Sanskrit is kesha–undaka, or what we call “floaters,”
which are visible when the eyes are closed. This is one of the
Buddha’s standard similes for our misperception of what is real.
67 Before proceeding, the Buddha establishes the non-
difference between dharmas and non-dharmas. Although this
doesn’t seem important, it will become so as non-dharmas turn
out to have the same characteristics as dharmas, and dharmas
are thus no more real than non-dharmas.
68 The Sanskrit is arya–jnana, where arya refers to “the noble
ones,” namely, buddhas.
69 Dharmas and non-dharmas are likened here to the flames,
among which any distinction must be arbitrary and not based on
anything real.
70 As with flames, distinctions of an object’s development are
likewise arbitrary. Everything is in constant flux in time, just as
everything is indivisible in space.
71 Matrices of abhidharma categories such as these were used
in early Buddhism for analysis of awareness according to
variations of the basic internal-external (nama–rupa) division.
The skandhas include form (external), sensation, perception,
memory, and consciousness (internal). The ayatanas included
the five powers of sensation (external) and their respective
domains (external) along with the sixth power of the mind and its
domain of thought (internal). The dhatus added the six forms of
consciousness (internal) that arise from the conjunction of the
twelve ayatanas.

72 That is, they possess no characteristics themselves.
73 Dharmas aren’t the problem. The problem is attachment to
the distinctions on which dharmas are based. In this chapter,
dharmas and non-dharmas are treated as equivalent to what in
subsequent chapters are name and appearance, the first two of
the five dharmas, which are the objects of projection.
74 According to the doctrine of prajnapti–matra (mere
designation/fabrication) taught by Yogacara teachers, everything
turns out to be a non-dharma, or made-up reality. Since all
dharmas are non-dharmas, to talk about one is to talk about the
other, and there is no need to talk about both. Hence,
throughout the rest of this sutra, the term “non-dharma” is not
mentioned again. See Section XIX in Chapter Two.
75 The Sanskrit for “reality” here is dharmata.
76 The projection (vikalpa) of dharmas and the fabrication
(prajnapti) of non–dharmas.
77 The Buddha’s comment here refers to the projection of
beings not to the beings themselves.
78 The Sanskrit is ekagra.
79 The Buddha waits until the very end of this chapter to
provide a list of rubrics that he will use throughout the rest of the
sutra to represent the moon toward which he points: the
tathagata-garbha in contrast to the alaya-vijnana, self- realization
of buddha knowledge in contrast to projection of dharmas and
non-dharmas, tranquility in contrast to nirvana, oneness in
contrast to multiplicity. Of course, “oneness” for the Buddha is
neither oneness nor multiplicity. This is why the Buddha smiles.
Bodhiruchi alone specifies “the samadhi of the forbearance of
non–arising.”

CHAPTER TWO:
MAHAMATI’S QUESTIONS

I1
Mahamati had previously visited other buddhalands together
with the other wise bodhisattvas. Now, by means of the
Buddha’s power, he rose from his seat, uncovered his right
shoulder, and touched his right knee to the ground. Pressing his
hands together and bowing in reverence, he praised the Buddha
in verse:
1. “Like a flower in the sky / the world neither ceases
nor arises / in the light of your wisdom and compassion3 / it
neither is nor isn‘t4
2. Transcending mind and consciousness / all things
are like illusions / in the light of your wisdom and
compassion / they neither are nor aren’t5
3. The world is but a dream / neither permanent nor
transient / in the light of your wisdom and compassion / it
neither is nor isn‘t6
4. There is no self in beings or things / no barriers of
passion or knowledge / in the light of your wisdom and
compassion / they neither are nor aren’t
5. The Buddha doesn’t dwell in nirvana / nor does
nirvana dwell in him / free from knowing and the known /
he neither is nor isn’t7
6. Who thus beholds Shakyamuni / serene and not

arising8 / dwells without attachments / this life and the
next.”

II9
After he had finished his verses in praise of the Buddha,
Mahamati introduced himself:
1. “My name is Mahamati / to plumb the depths of
the Mahayana / I come before the Peerless One / with 108
questions.”10
2. On hearing this request / the Knower of All Worlds
/ gazed upon the assembly / and told this son of buddhas
3. “Ask your questions / Son of Victors / ask and I
will explain / the realm of personal realization.”11
Acknowledging
the
Bhagavan’s
approval,
Mahamati
Bodhisattva touched his head to the Buddha’s feet, put his palms
together in reverence, and asked in verse:
4. “How is thinking purified / where does it come
from / how should we regard delusion / where does it
come from?
5. Why are there lands and apparitions / attributes
and other paths12 / stages of practice and freedom from
projection13 / and what does ‘son of victor’ mean?14
6. Where does liberation lead / who is bound and
who is freed / what are the realms of meditation / why are
there three paths?15
7. How does causation work / what is a cause or an

effect / why say they are different16 / and where do they
come from?
8. What are the formless meditations / what is
cessation of perception / after all perceptions cease / how
does awareness arise from trance?17
9. How do effects come about / how do we control
our body / how do we see what we see / where do stages
come from?18
10. Who breaks through all three realms19 / in what
place and body / where are they then born / and why are
there bodhisattvas?
11. How are higher powers gained / masteries and
samadhis / tell us, Victor of Victors / what is the mind in
samadhi like?
12. What is repository consciousness / the will and
conceptual consciousness20 / how do they arise and cease
/ what makes sensation stop?
13. What constitutes a lineage / no lineage or nothing
but mind21 / how are attributes acquired / what does ‘no
self’ mean?
14. How could there be no beings / why teach
conventional truths / how do we put an end to views / of
eternity or annihilation?22
15. Why do the Buddha and other teachers / not look
different from each other / why in future ages / will there be
different sects?23
16. What is the cause of emptiness / what does
‘momentary’ mean24 / where does a womb come from /
why does the world not shake?25

17. How is the world like a dream or illusion / a city
of gandharvas26 / a seasonal mirage / moonlight on the
water?
18. Why speak of aids to enlightenment27 / or
elements of awareness28 / what causes chaos in a kingdom
/ why does belief in existence exist?
19. Why does the world not arise or cease / how is it
like a flower in the sky29 / how do we know about the
world / if you say it transcends language?
20. What is freedom from projection like30 / how is it
like the sky / how many kinds of suchness are there /
consciousness or paramitas?31
21. How do we progress through stages / who gets
free from projection32 / what are the two kinds of no-self /
how do we purify knowledge?33
22. How many kinds of knowledge are there / moral
codes or beings / who created precious things / such things
as gems and pearls?
23. Who invented languages / the different kinds of
beings / who was it who revealed / fields of knowledge and
technique?34
24. How many forms of poetry are there / what about
prose and meter / how many kinds of logic are there / what
constitutes an explanation?
25. Where do food and drink come from / what gives
rise to sexual desire / what constitutes a king / a minor
regent or cakravartin?35
26. How do they protect their realms / how many
kinds of deities are there / what is meant by earth / the sun

and moon and stars?
27. How many kinds of liberation are there36 / how
many kinds of practitioners / how many kinds of disciples /
what constitutes a master?
28. How many kinds of buddhas are there / how
many lives do they live37 / how many kinds of demons exist
/ how many heterodox teachings?38
29. How many modes of reality are there39 / how
many kinds of mind40 / please tell me, Best of Speakers /
what does ‘mere designation’ mean?41
30. Why are there wind and clouds in the sky / why
do memory and insight exist / why are there trees and
forests / why are there grasses and vines?42
31. Why are elephants, horses, and deer / trapped
and caught by men / O, Charioteer of the Mind43 / why are
some people despised?
32. Why do we observe six seasons44 / why are
there icchantikas45 / how do males and females / and
androgynes come to be?46
33. Why do some adepts regress / why do some
advance / how do meditation masters teach / what kind of
people do they train?47
34. What are the marks and attributes / of beings
born in different realms48 / what constitutes material wealth
/ how is it acquired?49
35. How did the Shakyas come to be / the lineage of
the Ikshvakus / who was the ascetic sage / what was it that
he taught?50

36. How does the Tathagata appear / in every time
and place / surrounded by sons of victors / of different
names and likenesses?51
37. Why shouldn’t we eat meat / why is meat
proscribed / why are there carnivorous beings / why do
they eat meat?52
38. Why are lands and kingdoms / shaped like the
sun or moon / Sumeru or a lotus flower53 / a swastika or
lion?54
39. Why are lands and kingdoms / shaped like
Indra’s net55 / overturned above us / composed of
countless jewels?
40. Why are lands and kingdoms / shaped like a
drum or lute / or like some kind of flower / or bereft of the
sun and moon?56
41. What is an apparition buddha / a buddha of
fruition / what is a buddha of suchness / a buddha of true
knowledge?57
42. Why in the realm of desire / is enlightenment not
attained / why is it found beyond desire / in the highest
heaven of form?58
43. After the Sugata enters Nirvana59 / who will
uphold the Dharma / how long will the Teacher teach / how
long will his teaching last?60
44. How many kinds of attainment are there 61 / how
many doctrinal views / what is the cause and purpose / of a
code of ethics or monks?
45. Why do sons of victors62 / pratyeka–buddhas
and shravakas / experience a hundred transformations / a

hundred projectionless realms?63
46. Which powers are mundane / which ones are
transcendent / could you please explain / what are the
seven stages?64
47. How many kinds of sangha are there / what
brings about dissension / what are the texts on medicine /
what led to their creation?65
48. Why does Mahamuni / speak such words as
these / ‘I am Kashyapa Buddha / Krakucchanda and
Kanakamuni?’66
49. Why do you speak of a self and no self / of
eternity and annihilation / why not teach the truth /
‘everything is made of mind?”67
50. Why are there male and female trees / karitaki
and amali groves / Mount Kailash and the Iron Ring /
Diamond Summit and the other peaks?68
51. And why are all these mountains / adorned with
countless jewels / rishis and gandharvas69 / please tell us
why this is.”
52. After hearing all these gathas / on the teachings of
the Mahayana / on the heart of every buddha / the Knower
of Worlds then answered:
53. ”Well and ably asked / now listen, Mahamati / the
questions you have raised / I will answer one by one:70
54. As for birth and no birth / nirvana, emptiness, and
moments / rebirth and no self-existence71 / buddhas and
paramitas
55. Shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, and bodhisattvas /
the formless practices of other schools / Sumeru and seas

and mountains / continents and other lands72
56. The sun and moon and constellations / asuras73
and gods of other paths / liberations, masteries, and
powers74 / meditations and samadhis
57. Extinction and psychic travel / aids and elements
of enlightenment / meditations and boundless states /
transmigration and the skandhas75
58. Cessation of perception in meditation / thinking
and talking during samadhi / conceptual consciousness,
will, and mind / the five dharmas and no self76
59. Modes of reality, projecting, and projection / the
duality of seeing and seen / spiritual paths and lineages /
gold and silver and gems
60. Material elements and icchantikas / chaos and a
single buddha / knowing, the known, and instruction / the
existence or not of beings77
61. And as for why such animals / as elephants and
horses are caught / how reason and illustration work / or
how they give rise to proofs78
62. And as for cause and effect / penetrating a forest
of doubt / nothing but mind and no visible world / and no
sequence of stages79
63. And as for transformations and the end of
projections80 / medical treatments and crafts / sciences and
arts / and why you ask about these81
64. And as for how to measure / lands and mountains
and Sumeru / oceans and the sun and moon / and why you
ask about these82
65. And as for the number of dust motes / in beings

of different sizes / the dust motes in a realm / or how many
in a bow-length83
66. And as for forearms or feet in a krosha / in a
yojana or half a yojana / the rabbit hairs in a dust mote or
louse egg / the sheep hairs in a barley grain84
67. And as for barley grains in a quart / in a pint or in
a peck / in a bushel or ten or a hundred thousand / in a
million or a billion85
68. And as for dust motes in a mustard seed / or
mustard seeds in a grass grain / or grass grains in a pea / or
how many peas in a gram86
69. And as for how many grams in an ounce / or
ounces in a pound / or counting on like this / how many of
these in Sumeru87
70. As for what you rightly ask / and why should you
ask otherwise / but why not ask instead / the number of
dust motes in a shravaka / the number in a pratyeka-
buddha / in a bodhisattva or tathagata88
71. The dust motes in the tip of a flame / or in a gust
of wind / the number in an organ of sense / a skin pore or
an eyelash
72. But as for men of wealth and power / kings and
cakravartins / and how they protect their realms / and how
they obtain liberation
73. And as for poetry and prose / or why beings
want different things / like different foods and drinks / or
why there are male and female trees89
74. And as for the diamond-hard mountain / about
which you ask / why it resembles a dream or illusion / or a

seasonal mirage90
75. And as for why there are clouds / or why there
are six seasons / or why there are different flavors / or men
and women and androgynes91
76. And as for the wearing of jewelry / and why, Son
of Buddhas, you ask about this / or why rishis and
gandharvas / adorn these sacred peaks92
77. And as for where liberation leads / or who is
bound and who is freed / or the realms of meditation /
apparitions and other paths
78. And as for if causation exists / or if causation
doesn’t / or how perceptions vanish / or how thoughts are
purified93
79. And as for how to transform your thoughts94 / or
how to transform your actions / how to put an end to
projections / or how to rise from samadhi
80. And as for who breaks through the three realms /
and in what place or body / or if beings have no self / why
accept the conventional view95
81. And as for asking about my marks / or if I have
no self / or if my other bodies / are the product of a
womb96
82. And as for views of annihilation or eternity / or
how to settle the mind / or language and knowledge /
lineages, precepts, and bodhisattvas
83. And as for logic and explanation / masters and
disciples / the different kinds of beings / and why you ask
about these / and what they eat and drink / and demons,
insight, and designation97

84. And as for trees and vines / regarding which, Son
of Victors, you ask / and why there are different lands / or
who Dirghatapas was98
85. And as for my clan and family / or who my
teachers were / and why some people are despised / or
why some people meditate / and why there is no
enlightenment / in the realm of desire99
86. And as for why it happens / in Akanishtha
Heaven100 / or which powers are mundane / or what
constitutes a monk
87. And as for apparition buddhas / or buddhas of
fruition / or buddhas of true suchness / or buddhas of
impartial knowledge / or the nature of the sangha /
concerning which, Son of Victors, you ask101
88. And as for lands shaped like a drum, a lute, or a
flower / and why some lands are bereft of light / and what
the mind is like / during the seven stages102
89. All such things and more you ask / proper for a
son of buddhas / in accord with relevant forms / and free
from erroneous views103
90. Today I will reveal / truths that transcend words /
while I list them one by one / listen well, you bodhisattvas /
to these 108 statements:104 / as spoken by buddhas of the
past

III105
“A statement about birth is about no birth. A statement about
permanence is about no permanence. A statement about
characteristics is about no characteristics. A statement about
duration and differentiation is about no duration or
differentiation. A statement about moments is about no
moments. A statement about modes of reality is about no modes
of reality.106 A statement about emptiness is about no emptiness.
A statement about annihilation is about no annihilation. A
statement about extremes is about no extremes.107 A statement
about the middle is about no middle. A statement about eternity
is about no eternity. A statement about conditions is about no
conditions. A statement about cause is about no cause. A
statement about passion is about no passion. A statement about
desire is about no desire. A statement about expedience is about
no expedience. A statement about skill is about no skill.108 A
statement about purity is about no purity. A statement about
reasoning is about no reasoning. A statement about illustration is
about no illustration. A statement about disciples is about no
disciples. A statement about masters is about no masters. A
statement about lineage is about no lineage. A statement about
the three paths is about no three paths.109 A statement about
freedom from projections is about no freedom from

projections.110 A statement about vows is about no vows. A
statement about the three turnings is about no three turnings.111
A statement about appearances is about no appearances. A
statement about existence is about no existence.112 A statement
about inclusion is about no inclusion.113 A statement about the
personal realization of buddha knowledge is a statement about
no personal realization of buddha knowledge. A statement about
delight in whatever is present is about no delight in whatever is
present.114 A statement about lands is about no lands. A
statement about dust motes is about no dust motes. A statement
about water is about no water. A statement about bow-lengths is
about no bow-lengths. A statement about elements is about no
elements.115 A statement about enumeration is about no
enumeration.116 A statement about higher knowledge is about no
higher knowledge. A statement about the sky is about no sky. A
statement about clouds is about no clouds. A statement about
crafts is about no crafts.117 A statement about wind is about no
wind. A statement about earth is about no earth. A statement
about reflection is about no reflection. A statement about
designation is about no designation.118 A statement about self-
existence is about no self-existence. A statement about skandhas
is about no skandhas. A statement about beings is about no
beings. A statement about intellect is about no intellect. A
statement about nirvana is about no nirvana. A statement about
knowledge is about no knowledge. A statement about other
paths is about no other paths. A statement about confusion is
about no confusion. A statement about illusions is about no
illusions. A statement about dreams is about no dreams. A
statement about mirages is about no mirages. A statement about

images is about no images. A statement about wheels is about
no wheels.119 A statement about gandharvas is about no
gandharvas. A statement about devas is about no devas. A
statement about food or drink is about no food or drink. A
statement about sexual desire is about no sexual desire. A
statement about views is about no views. A statement about
paramitas is about no paramitas. A statement about precepts is
about no precepts. A statement about suns and moons and
constellations is about no suns or moons or constellations. A
statement about truths is about no truths. A statement about
effects is about no effects. A statement about arising from
cessation is about no arising from cessation.120 A statement
about medical treatment is about no medical treatment. A
statement about attributes is about no attributes. A statement
about aids is about no aids.121 A statement about arts is about
no arts. A statement about meditation is about no meditation. A
statement about delusion is about no delusion. A statement
about visible objects is about no visible objects. A statement
about protection is about no protection. A statement about
genealogy is about no genealogy. A statement about rishis is
about no rishis. A statement about kings is about no kings. A
statement about grasping is about no grasping. A statement
about jewels is about no jewels. A statement about assurances is
about no assurances.122 A statement about icchantikas is about
no icchantikas. A statement about men and women and
androgynes is about no men or women or androgynes. A
statement about taste is about no taste. A statement about effort
is about no effort. A statement about bodies is about no bodies.
A statement about thinking is about no thinking. A statement
about movement is about no movement. A statement about

sense organs is about no sense organs. A statement about
conditioned things is about no conditioned things. A statement
about unconditioned things is a statement about no
unconditioned things.123 A statement about causation is about no
causation. A statement about Akanishtha Heaven is about no
Akanishtha Heaven. A statement about seasons is about no
seasons. A statement about trees and vines is about no trees or
vines. A statement about variety is about no variety. A statement
about instruction is about no instruction. A statement about
moral codes is about no moral codes. A statement about monks
is about no monks .124 A statement about support is about no
support.125 A statement about words is about no words.
Mahamati, these 108 answers 126 were spoken by the buddhas
of the past. These are what you and the other bodhisattvas
should study.“127

IV128
Mahamati Bodhisattva again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan,
in how many ways do the various forms of consciousness arise,
persist, and cease?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are two ways in which
the various forms of consciousness arise, persist, and cease,
both of which are beyond the understanding of logicians. The
two ways in which the forms of consciousness arise are as a
continuity or as a characteristic.129 The two ways in which they
persist are as a continuity or as a characteristic. And the two
ways in which they cease are as a continuity or as a
characteristic.130 And the different forms of consciousness,
Mahamati, have three aspects: an unfolding aspect, a karmic
aspect, and an intrinsic aspect.131
“Mahamati, what we generally speak of as eight forms of
consciousness can be summarized under three headings: true
consciousness, perceiving consciousness, and object-projecting
consciousness.132 Mahamati, our perceiving consciousness
functions like a clear mirror in which shapes and images appear.
Mahamati, although perceiving consciousness and object-
projecting consciousness are the cause of whether they are
separate from each other or not, perceiving consciousness,
Mahamati, is the result of imperceptible habit-energy and

imperceptible
transformations,
while
object-projecting
consciousness is the result of grasping different phenomena and
the habit-energy of beginningless projections.133
“Mahamati, when all the false projections obscuring our true
consciousness 134 cease, all forms of sensory consciousness
cease. This, Mahamati, is what is meant by the ‘cessation of
characteristics.’ Mahamati, as for the ‘cessation of continuity,’
when the cause of continuity ceases, continuity itself ceases. It
ceases when what it depends upon and what supports it cease.
Mahamati, why is this so? This is because it is dependent. What
it depends upon is the habit-energy of beginningless projections.
And what supports it are the projections of the objects of
consciousness perceived by one’s own mind.135
“Mahamati, take for example a lump of clay and particles of
dust. They are neither separate, nor are they not separate. The
same is true of gold and ornaments. Mahamati, if the lump of
clay and particles of dust were separate, the latter could not
comprise the former. But they do. Hence, they are not separate.
And yet if they were not separate, the lump of clay could not be
distinguished from the particles of dust.
“Thus, Mahamati, if the intrinsic aspect136 of our repository
consciousness and the unfolding aspect of consciousness were
separate, the repository consciousness could not be its cause.
But if they were not separate, the cessation of the unfolding
aspect of consciousness would also mean the cessation of
repository consciousness. And yet, its intrinsic aspect does not
cease. Thus, Mahamati, what ceases is not the intrinsic aspect of
consciousness, only its karmic aspect. For if the intrinsic aspect
of consciousness ceased, repository consciousness would
cease. And if repository consciousness ceased, Mahamati, that

would be no different from the nihilistic views proposed by
followers of other paths.
“Mahamati, the followers of other paths claim that when the
grasping of an external world ceases, the continuity of
consciousness also ceases. But if the continuity of consciousness
ceased, that continuity which has no beginning would end.
Mahamati, followers of still other paths say the arising of
continuity is not caused by the conjunction of visual
consciousness with form and light137 but is caused by something
else. And that cause, Mahamati, they say is an ineffable force or
primal being or supreme lord or minute particles or time.138

V139
“Furthermore, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of self-
existence:140 the self-existence of origination, the self-existence
of existence, the self-existence of characteristics, the self-
existence of material elements, the self-existence of causes, the
self-existence of conditions, and the self-existence of
completion.

VI141
“Furthermore, Mahamati, there are seven kinds of higher
truths:142 those regarding the realm of mind, the realm of
wisdom, the realm of knowledge, the realm of views, the realm
beyond dualistic views, the realm beyond bodhisattva stages,
and the realm of a tathagata’s personal attainment, which,
Mahamati, is the mind of the self-existent, higher truth of all
tathagatas, arhats, and fully enlightened ones of the past, the
present, and the future. It is by means of this mind of the self-
existent, higher truth that the mundane, metaphysical, and
transcendent teachings of tathagatas are formed, while it is by
means of their wisdom eye143 that their individual and shared
characteristics are established. However, what are thereby
established are not the same as the doctrines and erroneous
views of other schools.
“And what are the same, Mahamati, as the doctrines and
erroneous views of other schools? These refer to projections
and views of one’s own realm without realizing they are
perceptions of one’s own mind. Due to their obliviousness,
Mahamati, such foolish people maintain dualistic views and
doctrines of existence and nonexistence as their self-existent,
higher truth.
“Moreover, Mahamati, the cessation of the suffering that

comes from giving rise to projections of the three realms144 and
the cessation of ignorance, desire, and karma that result from
seeing that the perceptions of one’s own mind are realms of
illusion, this is what I will now teach.145

VII146
“Mahamati, to account for how something that doesn’t exist
comes to exist due to the presence of causation and how it
persists in time in connection with the skandhas, the dhatus, and
the ayatanas, some monks and priests say once it arises, it
ceases. Mahamati, whether it is in regard to a continuity, a
function, a birth, an existence, nirvana, a path, karma,
attainment, or truth, they argue that it is destroyed and ceases to
exist. And why is this so? Because it cannot be found in the
present, nor can its beginning be discerned.
“Mahamati, just as a shattered jug no longer functions as a jug
or a burnt seed no longer functions as a seed, likewise,
Mahamati, if the skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas exist then
cease to exist in the present or the future, this is due to the
projection or view of one’s own mind, not to a cause. This is
why they don’t continue to arise.147
“Mahamati, if someone says the existence of consciousness
from its nonexistence is due to the threefold conjunction of
conditions, then hair could grow on a tortoise or cooking oil
could be produced from sand.148 Such a thesis falls apart
because it is contrary to established truth. And statements about
the existence then nonexistence of something contain this defect:
they render whatever we might do as empty and meaningless.

“Mahamati, when followers of other paths claim something
arises because of the threefold conjunction of conditions, they
are referring to the operation of cause and effect and to whether
their individual characteristics exist then do not exist in the past,
the present, or the future. But such claims are essentially the
result of logic or speculation or views based on one’s habit-
energy from the past. Thus, Mahamati, despite being infected by
mistaken conceptions and misled by distorted beliefs, and
despite their lack of knowledge, fools claim to be wise.
“But there are other monks and priests, Mahamati, who see
things as devoid of self-existence, as clouds in the sky or wheels
of fire or cities of gandharvas and as not arising, as illusions or
mirages or dreams or moonlight on the water, and—regardless
of whether they appear to be inside or outside the mind—as
projections from the beginningless past and as not existing apart
from one’s own mind. And when the causes of such projections
cease, and the repository consciousness becomes free from
projections of a body, its possessions and the world around it,
and from what speaks and what is spoken, and from what sees
and what is seen, they accordingly see what grasps and what is
grasped as no longer interacting in the realm of consciousness
and whatever the mind gives rise to as existing in a projection-
free realm devoid of origination, duration, and cessation.
“Mahamati, such bodhisattvas soon realize the identity of
samsara149 and nirvana. With effortless compassion and skillful
means, Mahamati, they view the realms of all beings as illusions
and not subject to causation. Transcending internal and external
realms, and seeing nothing outside the mind, they accordingly
proceed from one stage to the next in samadhis that are free
from appearances. And upon examining the three realms and

finding them illusory, they attain the Samadhi of the Illusory.150
And once the perceptions of their own minds are free of
projections, they are able to dwell in the perfection of wisdom
and to let go of their life and their practice and to enter the
Diamond Samadhi that accompanies a tathagata’s body and that
accompanies the transformation of suchness. Thus endowed
with higher powers and masteries as well as compassion and
skillful means, they enter the sanctuaries of other paths in every
buddhaland. And transcending the mind, the will, and conceptual
consciousness, these bodhisattvas gradually transform their body
into the body of a tathagata.151
“Therefore, Mahamati, those who seek the body that
accompanies a tathagata should avoid the fabricated projections
of origination, duration, or cessation regarding the skandhas,
dhatus, ayatanas, consciousness, causation, or forms of
practice.”152

VIII153
“Who sees that the habit-energy of projections of the
beginningless past is the cause of the three realms and who
understands that the tathagata stage is free from projections or
anything that arises, attains the personal realization of buddha
knowledge and effortless mastery over their own minds. And
like gems capable of reflecting every color, they enter the
subtlest thoughts of other beings and in their apparition bodies
teach them ‘nothing but mind’ while establishing them in the
sequence of stages. Therefore, Mahamati, you should devote
yourself to the cultivation of personal attainment.”

IX154
At that time, Mahamati Bodhisattva said, “May155 the
Bhagavan teach us about the characteristics of the mind, the will
and conceptual consciousness,156 the five dharmas, and the
modes of reality cultivated by buddhas and bodhisattvas that
differ from the external realms perceived by our mind. And may
the Tathagata reveal all the teachings marked by suchness that
comprise the heart of the words of every buddha. And may he
explain for the great bodhisattvas gathered here on Mount
Malaya in the island kingdom of Lanka the ocean and waves of
repository consciousness and the realm of the dharma body157
praised by all tathagatas.”
The Bhagavan then told Mahamati, “There are four causes
that result in the functioning of visual consciousness. And what
are the four? They are: a lack of awareness that what is grasped
is a perception of one’s own mind, attachment to the habit-
energy of erroneous fabrications of the beginningless past, the
existence of consciousness, and the desire to see a multiplicity of
forms. Mahamati, these are the four causes that give rise to the
waves of consciousness in the ever-rolling sea of repository
consciousness.158
“Mahamati, as with its visual form, consciousness arises
together with the minutest sensory objects and sensory material

of the various sense organs, and with it arise external realms as
well like so many images in a clear mirror or like the ocean when
a strong wind blows. And as the wind of externality stirs the sea
of the mind, its waves of consciousness never cease.159
Whether there is any difference or not among the characteristics
of causes and effects is due to a deep attachment to what arises
from karma. Because people cannot understand the nature of
such things as form, the five kinds of sensory consciousness
function. And due to the differentiation of appearances,
Mahamati, you should know that these five kinds of sensory
consciousness serve as the cause of conceptual consciousness.
But as they function, they do not think that they are the cause of
changes in appearances, which change as a result of attachment
to projections that are perceptions of one’s own mind. And as
every appearance changes and disappears, the different realms
that are distinguished themselves change.160
“Those practitioners who enter dhyana or samadhi but who
remain unaware of the changes of the subtler forms of habit-
energy think they enter dhyana or samadhi only after
consciousness ceases. But in fact their consciousness does not
cease when they enter samadhi. It doesn’t cease because the
seeds of habit-energy are not destroyed. It ceases when they no
longer grasp changes among objective realms.
“Mahamati, except for tathagatas and those well along the
bodhisattva path, the full extent of the subtlety of the repository
consciousness remains completely beyond the ken of shravakas,
pratyeka-buddhas, and practitioners of other paths, despite their
powers of meditation and wisdom—likewise how to distinguish
the characteristics of the remaining stages, or the meaning of
words about wisdom and skillful means, or how to bring to

maturity the limitless good roots planted by buddhas, or how to
get free from the projections and fabrications that are
perceptions of their own minds.
“Mahamati, those who dwell among mountains and forests,
regardless of whether they cultivate lesser, normal, or greater
practices, if they are able to see how projections flow from their
own minds, they will have their foreheads anointed by buddhas
from countless lands. And as they attain masteries, psychic
faculties, higher powers, and samadhis, they will be surrounded
by bodhisattvas and spiritual friends. And because of this, they
will transcend the sea of birth and death, karma, desire, and
ignorance and the mistaken conceptions concerning the realms
of self-existence of the mind, the will, and conceptual
consciousness that are perceptions of their own minds. This is
why, Mahamati, practitioners should draw near to buddhas and
spiritual friends.”
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “Just like waves in a boundless sea / blown by a
powerful wind / breakers in a black expanse / they never
for a moment cease
2. In the Ocean of Alaya / stirred by the wind of
externality / wave after wave of consciousness / breaks
and swells again
3. Blue and red and every color / milk and sugar and
conch shells161 / fragrances and fruits and flowers / the sun
and moon and light
4. Like the ocean and its waves / are neither separate
nor not separate / seven forms of consciousness / rise
together with the mind162

5. Like the ever-changing sea / gives rise to different
waves / repository consciousness / gives rise to different
forms163
6. Mind, will, and consciousness / these refer to
different forms / but forms devoid of differences / no seer
or thing seen164
7. As the ocean and its waves / cannot be divided /
the mind and the forms of consciousness / cannot be
separated
8.1he mind is what gathers karma165 / the will
considers what is gathered / the forms of consciousness166
are conscious / of five apparent worlds.”
Mahamati Bodhisattva then asked in verse:
9. “When colors such as blue and red / appear in
someone’s consciousness / and every thought is like a
wave / what does all this mean?”
The Bhagavan then replied in verse:
10. “Blue and red and other colors / can’t be found in
any wave / we say the mind gathers karma / to awaken
foolish beings
11. But karma isn’t real / thus to make their minds let
go / what grasps and what is grasped167 / I liken it to
waves
12. Their body, possessions, and the world / this is
what they’re conscious of / this is how their karma appears
/ just like surging waves.”
Mahamati Bodhisattva then asked in verse:
13. “The ocean and its waves exist / we can see them
dance / why then are we not aware / of alaya
consciousness and karma?”168

The Bhagavan then replied in verse:
14. “For fools bereft of wisdom / alaya is likened to
an ocean / and karma to its waves / through simile they
understand.”
Mahamati then said in verse:
15. “Sunlight shines the same / on beings of all classes
/ since tathagatas light the world / to teach the truth to fools
16. Versed in every kind of teaching / why don’t they
teach the truth?”
To which the Buddha then replied in verse, “If they taught the
truth / in beings’ minds would be no truth
17. Like the ocean and its waves / a dream or image
in a mirror / both appear together / as do the mind and
objective realms170
18. But objective realms are never perfect / and
karma keeps arising / while consciousness is conscious /
likewise the will just wills
19. And fivefold are appearances / except in
meditation / as a master artist works / and the master’s
students171
20. Drawing forms and spreading colors / I, too,
teach like this / the colors don’t contain a pattern / nor do
the brush or pristine surface
21. To please the host of beings / they render figures
with their art / but teachings are unfaithful172 / for truth isn’t
in the words
22. I make distinctions for beginners173 / for
practitioners I teach the truth / the truth they realize
themselves / free from knowing and the known
23. This I teach to bodhisattvas / a broader view to

fools / all manner of illusions / but nothing I reveal is real
24. Thus my teachings are diverse / tailored to the
situation / if a teaching doesn’t fit / then it isn’t taught
25. Because each patient differs / good physicians
adjust their cures / buddhas thus teach beings / according
to their capacities
26. A realm without projections / unknown to
shravakas / this is what the compassionate teach / the
realm of inner realization.”

X174
“Moreover, Mahamati, if bodhisattvas wish to understand the
realm of projection in which what grasps and what is grasped
are nothing but perceptions of their own minds, they should
avoid social intercourse and sleep and cultivate the discipline of
mindfulness during the three periods of the night. And they
should avoid mistaken teachings and texts as well as the
characteristics of the shravaka and pratyeka-buddha paths and
become versed instead in the characteristics of the projections
that are perceptions of their own minds.

XI175
“Moreover, Mahamati, once bodhisattvas have firmly
established themselves in the attributes of wisdom, they should
devote themselves to the cultivation of three aspects of the
highest buddha knowledge. And to which three aspects of
buddha knowledge should they devote themselves? They are
freedom from projections, 176 the power of the vows made by
all buddhas, and the personal realization of the ultimate
knowledge of buddhas. Once their cultivation includes these,
they will be able to abandon feebleminded knowledge and reach
the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path.177
“In the cultivation of these three, Mahamati, freedom from
projections comes from the practices of shravakas, pratyeka-
buddhas, and followers of other paths; the power of vows,
Mahamati, comes from the vows made by buddhas of the past;
and the personal realization of the ultimate knowledge of
buddhas, Mahamati, comes from remaining detached from all
appearances, from obtaining the body that accompanies the
Samadhi of the Illusory,178 and from entering that place where
all buddhas dwell. Mahamati, these are the three aspects of
buddha knowledge. Those who perfect these three aspects of
buddha knowledge are able to reach the realm of personal
realization of the ultimate knowledge of buddhas. Mahamati, this

is why you should devote yourself to the cultivation of the three
aspects of buddha knowledge.”
Because Mahamati was aware of the thoughts of the other
bodhisattvas about how to distinguish the essential teaching of
buddha knowledge and because he was supported by the
manifest power of the tathagatas, he asked the Buddha, “Would
the Bhagavan please explain how to understand the essential
teaching of buddha knowledge on the basis of which the 108
statements are to be distinguished, and on the basis of which
tathagatas, arhats, and fully enlightened ones explain how to
distinguish the individual and shared characteristics of the
imagined reality into which bodhisattvas enter. For by explaining
how to distinguish imagined reality, we will be able to understand
the absence of a self among beings and dharmas wherever we
look. And by ridding ourselves of such projections and by
illuminating the various stages, we will transcend the bliss of the
meditations of shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, and followers of
other paths, and we will see the inconceivable realms cultivated
by tathagatas. And we will finally let go of the five dharmas and
the modes of reality and adorn ourselves instead with the
knowledge of a tathagata’s dharma body, leave behind illusory
realms,179 and ascend to the Tushita and Akanishtha heavens of
every buddhaland,180 where we will obtain the ever-present
body of a tathagata.”181

XII182
The Bhagavan told Mahamati, “There are followers of some
paths attached to the projection of nothingness who imagine the
nonexistence of rabbit horns when what causes them ends183
and that, as with the nonexistence of rabbit horns, the same is
true of everything else. And there are followers of other paths,
Mahamati, who distinguish each and every thing in terms of
elements, tendencies, particles, substances, or shapes and,
having seen that there are no such things as rabbit horns,
become attached to the conception that ox horns exist.184
“Mahamati, because they are given to such dualistic extremes,
they don’t understand what is nothing but mind and nourish,
instead, the projection of realms of their own conception. But
such things as their body, their possessions, and the world
around them are nothing but projections of sensation. Mahamati,
this is true of the existence of all things. They transcend existence
and nonexistence. You should not imagine such things.
“Mahamati, since they transcend existence and nonexistence,
someone who thinks rabbit horns don’t exist suffers from a
misconception. They should not think that rabbit horns don’t
exist, because such a view would be relative. And if they were
to analyze whatever does exist into the finest particles, they
would not find anything there. Mahamati, because it would be

outside the realm of buddha knowledge, you should not imagine
that ox horns exist.”
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, if someone
imagines something as not existing, is it because they see it as
not arising that they subsequently reason since their observation
doesn’t result in its discrimination, it doesn’t exist?”
The Buddha replied, “Not so, Mahamati. It isn’t because
their observation doesn’t result in its discrimination that they say
something doesn’t exist. And why not? It is because
discriminations arise in dependence on something. They arise in
dependence on horns. And because a discrimination arises in
dependence on horns, they are said to be its cause. Hence, it is
not because observation doesn’t result in their discrimination that
they say horns do not exist, rather it is because they are neither
separate nor not separate.
“Mahamati, if the discrimination is separate from the horns, its
occurrence is not dependent on the horns. And if it isn’t
separate, it is dependent on them. But no matter how minutely
you analyze and examine them, you cannot find anything there.
Also, because it isn’t separate from the horns, it doesn’t exist by
itself. But if neither exists by itself, on what basis do we say it
doesn’t exist? Mahamati, if it185 doesn’t exist, then the horns
don’t exist. But you should not think that rabbits do not have
horns on the basis of observation. Mahamati, it is because there
is no direct cause that arguments in favor of existence or
nonexistence cannot be proved.
“Mahamati, there are followers of other paths who are
attached to such things as form and space as having shape and
location. Although they aren’t able to distinguish space, they say
space exists apart from form, and they thus give rise to the

projection of their separation. Mahamati, space is form. It is part
of the material elements. And form is space, Mahamati. But in
order to establish the existence of which supports and which is
supported, they separate space and form. Although their
individual characteristics differ, Mahamati, where the four
material elements are present, they neither occupy space, nor do
they exist without space.
“Likewise, Mahamati, oxen are observed with horns and
rabbits without horns. But, Mahamati, if you were to grind ox
horns into the finest particles and didn’t stop analyzing those
particles for even a moment, could you say they did not exist
based on what you saw? Anything else you might examine
would be the same.”
The Bhagavan then told Mahamati Bodhisattva, “You should
avoid projections that view rabbit horns or ox horns, space or
form as separate. You and the other bodhisattvas should reflect
on projections as perceptions of your own mind. And in
whatever lands you might find yourselves, teach bodhisattvas
about the perceptions of their own minds.”

XIII186
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “There is no form inside the mind187 / form is
nourished by the mind / body, possessions, the world, and
beings / from repository consciousness all appear
2. The mind, will, and consciousness / the five
dharmas and modes of reality / the purification of two
kinds of no-self / these are taught by those who teach
3. Long and short, is and isn’t / from each in turn the
other arises / because one isn’t, the other is / because one
is, the other isn’t
4. Analyzing something into dust / doesn’t yield the
idea of its form / but saying it is nothing but mind / doesn’t
please deluded people
5. This isn’t a realm for philosophers / nor is it for
shravakas / the teaching of those who would save the
world / is the realm of self-realization.”

XIV188
In order to purify189 the stream of perceptions of his own
mind, Mahamati Bodhisattva once more asked the Buddha,
“Bhagavan, how is the stream of perceptions of beings’ minds
purified? By degrees or all at once?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “By degrees and not all at once.
Like the gooseberry, 190 which ripens by degrees and not all at
once, thus do tathagatas purify the stream of perceptions of
beings’ minds by degrees and not all at once. Or like a potter,
who makes vessels by degrees and not all at once, thus do
tathagatas purify the stream of perceptions of beings’ minds by
degrees and not all at once. Or like the earth, which gives birth
to living things by degrees and not all at once, thus do tathagatas
purify the stream of perceptions of beings’ minds by degrees and
not all at once. Or like when people become proficient in such
arts as music or writing or painting by degrees and not all at
once, thus do tathagatas purify the stream of perceptions of
beings’ minds by degrees and not all at once.191
“Or just as a clear mirror reflects formless192 images all at
once, tathagatas likewise purify the stream of perceptions of
beings’ minds by displaying pure, formless, undifferentiated
realms all at once. Or just as the sun and moon illuminate images
all at once, tathagatas likewise reveal the supreme realm of

inconceivable wisdom all at once to those who have freed
themselves of the habit-energy and misconceptions that are
perceptions of their own minds. Or just as repository
consciousness distinguishes such different perceptions of one’s
mind as the realms of the body, its possessions, and the world
around it all at once, nishyanda buddhas193 likewise bring beings
to maturity in whatever realm they dwell all at once and lead
practitioners to reside in Akanishtha Heaven.194 Or just as the
nishyanda buddhas created by the dharmata buddha radiate
light, the personal realization of buddha knowledge likewise
illuminates and dispels erroneous views and projections
regarding the existence or nonexistence of dharmas and their
characteristics.195

XV196
“Mahamati, the dharmata-nishyanda buddha197 teaches that
the individual and shared characteristics of every dharma are
due to the habit-energy of the perceptions of the mind and to the
continued attachment to an imagined reality198 that is no more
real than an illusion—and one that cannot be grasped.
“Moreover, Mahamati, an imagined reality arises from
attachment to a dependent reality. Mahamati, it is like when a
magician uses materials such as plants and wood and tiles and
stone to create an illusion and conjures the appearance of
different creatures, which then gives rise to different projections,
but projections that are not real.199 In the same manner,
Mahamati, it is based on a dependent reality that the myriad
projections of an imagined reality arise—the myriad projections
of appearances that are the habit-energy of attachment to
projections. Mahamati, this is how the appearances of an
imagined reality arise. Mahamati, this is what the nishyanda
buddha teaches.
“Mahamati, what the dharmata buddha does is establish and
create that realm which transcends self-existent appearances of
the mind and on which the personal realization of buddha
knowledge depends.200
“Mahamati, the nirmita-nirmana buddha201 teaches charity,

morality, forbearance, zeal, meditation, and wisdom of the mind,
detachment from the skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas, liberation
from the projection, contemplation, and establishment of
appearances of consciousness, and transcendence of the views
of followers of other paths and the views of formlessness.
“Also, Mahamati, the dharmata buddha is free from objective
support.202 Freedom from objective support and from the
operation of sensation is not a realm known to ignorant people,
shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, or followers of other paths
attached to a self but is the ultimate, unique realm established by
the personal realization of buddha knowledge. Therefore,
Mahamati, you should devote yourself to cultivating the personal
realization of this ultimate, unique realm of buddha knowledge
and put an end to views that are perceptions of the mind.

XVI203
“Moreover, Mahamati, there are two differences that
characterize the shravaka path: the differences in their attainment
of the personal realization of buddha knowledge and in their
attachment to the existence of an imagined reality.
“And what is different about a shravaka’s attainment of the
personal realization of buddha knowledge? This refers to
attaining stillness of mind in regard to the realms of
impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and the absence of a self, in
regard to the truths concerning the cessation and transcendence
of desire,204 and in regard to the end of anything indestructible
among the individual or shared characteristics of the skandhas,
dhatus, and ayatanas. And with stillness of mind come the
liberation of dhyana, the final fruit of samadhi, and the
deliverance of samapatti. But while enjoying the bliss from the
personal realization of buddha knowledge, shravakas are not yet
free of habit-energy or imperceptible transformation deaths.205
This is how a shravaka’s attainment of the personal realization of
buddha knowledge differs.
“Mahamati, the bliss from the personal realization of buddha
knowledge attained by bodhisattvas differs in that they avoid the
bliss of annihilation and the bliss of samapatti, which they do not
experience because of their compassion for others and their

original vows. Mahamati, this is how the bliss attained by
shravakas from the personal realization of buddha knowledge
differs. And this difference in the bliss from the personal
realization of buddha knowledge is not something bodhisattvas
should cultivate.
“Mahamati, what is meant by the attachment of shravakas to
the existence of an imagined reality? This refers to knowing that
the individual and shared characteristics of blue and yellow and
red and white and of solidity and moisture and warmth and
movement of the material elements arise without a creator, as
previous sages have declared, but upon seeing them, giving rise
to projections of their self-existence.206 This is what is meant by
the attachment of shravakas to the existence of an imagined
reality. This is something bodhisattvas should understand and put
an end to by getting rid of views concerning a self among
dharmas along with those concerning a self among persons, as
they proceed to establish themselves in the sequence of
stages.“207

XVII208
At that time, Mahamati Bodhisattva asked the Buddha,
“Bhagavan, the Tathagata teaches that what is eternal and
inconceivable209 is the realm of ultimate truth, the realm of
buddha knowledge one realizes oneself. Bhagavan, do other
schools not teach that what is eternal and inconceivable is a
cause?”210
The Buddha told Mahamati, “The cause of other schools
does not qualify as eternal and inconceivable. And why not?
Because what other schools claim is eternal and inconceivable is
not the result of its own causal attribute. If what is eternal and
inconceivable is not the result of its own causal attribute, on
what basis does it appear as eternal and inconceivable?
Furthermore, Mahamati, if what is inconceivable were the result
of its own causal attribute, it would be eternal. But because it
would be due to the causal attribute of a creator, it would not
qualify as eternal and inconceivable.
“Mahamati, the reason my ultimate truth is eternal and
inconceivable is because ultimate truth is the result of a causal
attribute that transcends existence and nonexistence. Because
the attainment of personal realization is its attribute, it has an
attribute. And because the knowledge of ultimate truth is its
cause, it has a cause. And because it is beyond existence and

nonexistence, it resembles what is not created: space, nirvana,
and complete cessation. This is why it is eternal. Hence,
Mahamati, it is not the same as the doctrines about what is
eternal and inconceivable of other schools. Thus, Mahamati, this
eternal and inconceivable is attained by the personal realization
of the knowledge of the tathagatas. Therefore, the eternal and
inconceivable attained by the personal realization of buddha
knowledge is what you should cultivate.
“Moreover, Mahamati, the eternal and inconceivable of
members of other schools is impermanent because it is caused
by something else and because it lacks the power to create its
own causal attribute. Also, Mahamati, members of other schools
consider their eternal and inconceivable as eternal despite having
witnessed the impermanence of the existence and nonexistence
of what is created.
“Mahamati, despite having witnessed the impermanence of
the existence and nonexistence of what is created, I could use
the same method to claim that the realm of buddha knowledge
realized by oneself is eternal and free from causes. Mahamati, if
the eternal and inconceivable of other schools were the result of
a causal attribute and that causal attribute did not itself exist, it
would be the same as horns on a rabbit. Their eternal and
inconceivable would be merely words and imagination. This is
the problem among members of other schools. And how so?
Because what is merely words and imagination is the same as
rabbit horns, for which a causal attribute does not exist.
“Mahamati, what I speak of as eternal and inconceivable is
eternal because it is based on the attribute of personal realization
and because it transcends the existence and nonexistence of
what is created. It is not in consideration of the impermanence of

external nonexistence that it is eternal. Mahamati, if what is
eternal and inconceivable were eternal in consideration of the
impermanence of external nonexistence, there would be no way
to know the eternal and inconceivable’s own causal attribute. As
this distracts people from the attainment of the personal
realization of the realm of buddha knowledge, it is not worth
talking about.211

XVIII212
“Furthermore, Mahamati, shravakas who are afraid of the
suffering that comes from their projection of samsara seek
nirvana unaware that the difference between samsara and
nirvana, as well as their projection of everything else, does not
exist.213 They conceive of nirvana as the cessation of all future
sensory
realms,
not
the
transformation
of
repository
consciousness through the personal realization of buddha
knowledge. Thus, ignorant people speak of three paths214 and
not of the projection-free realm that is nothing but mind.215
Mahamati, they therefore do not know the realm of the mind
perceived by tathagatas of the past, the present, and the future.
Instead, they are attached to the perception of a realm outside
the mind and keep turning the wheel of samsara.

XIX216
“Furthermore, Mahamati, nothing arises. This is what the
tathagatas of the past, the present, and the future teach. And
how so? Because existence and nonexistence are perceptions of
one’s own mind, the existence or nonexistence of which does
not arise. Mahamati, nothing that exists arises. Everything is like
horns on a rabbit or a horse, the mistaken projections of an
imagined reality by ignorant beings. Therefore, Mahamati,
nothing that exists arises. The non-arising that characterizes all
that exists, this is the personal realization of the realm of buddha
knowledge, not the dualistic realm of projections of the
ignorant.217 The existence that characterizes such things as your
body, your possessions, and the world around you, Mahamati,
is the interplay of the grasping and the grasped of repository
consciousness.218 Trapped by their dualistic views of origination,
duration, and cessation and their wish for things to arise, the
ignorant give rise to projections of existence and nonexistence,
not the wise. Mahamati, you should reflect on this in your
practice.

XX219
“Furthermore, Mahamati, there are five lineages of
realization.220 And what are the five? They are the lineage of
shravaka realization, the lineage of pratyeka-buddha realization,
the lineage of tathagata realization, the indeterminate lineage, and
the distant lineage.221
“How do we recognize the lineage of shravaka realization?
Upon learning how to put an end to the individual and shared
characteristics of the skandhas, the dhatus, and the ayatanas, the
hair on their entire body stands on end, and they delight in
cultivating a knowledge of characteristics but not in cultivating an
awareness of dependent origination.222 This is what is meant by
the lineage of shravaka realization. The realization of a shravaka
belongs to the fifth and sixth stages.223 They put an end to the
arising of passion but not to the habit-energy of passion. And
they escape karmic deaths but do not escape imperceptible
transformation deaths.224 They bellow the lion’s roar: ‘My lives
have ended. I have walked the path of purity. I will not suffer
another existence.’ Thus, they cultivate the knowledge that there
is no self among persons and think that they have attained
nirvana.
“Mahamati, those whose realization is distant225 also seek
nirvana but think of it in terms of a self or a being or a life or an

individuality.226 And there are followers of still other paths227
who think everything depends on a creator and when its
existence comes to an end that is nirvana. Those who think like
this are incapable of seeing that there is no self in dharmas, and
for them there is no liberation. Mahamati, these lineages of
shravaka realization and those of other schools do not transcend
the concept of transcendence. You should practice with
diligence to transform such pernicious views.
“Mahamati, as for the lineage of pratyeka-buddha realization,
upon hearing about the realization of different causal
conditions,228 the hair on their entire body stands on end, and
they weep tears of sorrow, and they avoid conditions or any
attachment to them. But when they hear about different bodies
and powers and different transformations involving combination
and separation, their minds are captivated. Anyone whose
understanding belongs to the lineage of pratyeka-buddha
realization is taught in accordance with the pratyeka-buddha
path. This is what characterizes the lineage of pratyeka-buddha
realization.
“Mahamati, as for the lineage of tathagata realization, there
are four kinds:229 the lineage of realization concerned with the
reality of dharmas,230 the lineage of realization concerned with
the non-reality of dharmas,231 the lineage of realization
concerned with the attainment of the personal realization of
buddha knowledge, and the lineage of realization concerned
with the splendors of external buddhalands. Mahamati, when
someone hears these four described one after the other, as well
as the inconceivable realm232 whereby their body, possessions,
and the world around them are merely perceptions of their own
minds, and they are not terrified or alarmed, this is what

characterizes membership in the lineages of tathagata realization.
“Mahamati, the indeterminate lineage includes those who are
instructed in these three lineages233 but who enter according to
one teaching and succeed according to another. Mahamati, even
if they are at the stage of initial purification where lineages are
established,
if
they
establish
themselves
beyond
the
projectionless stage,234 and they purify the habit-energy of their
passions through the personal realization of the repository
consciousness,235 and they see that dharmas have no self, even
if they are shravakas dwelling in the bliss of samadhi, they will
attain the glorious body of a tathagata.”236

XXI237
The Bhagavan then repeated this teaching in verse:
1. “The goal of finding the stream / returning once
more or not at all / or reaching the birthless state238 / all are
confusions of the mind
2. Sometimes I teach three paths / sometimes one
and sometimes none / for fools and those of little wisdom /
and the wise who dwell apart239
3. The teaching of ultimate truth / transcends all
dualities / for those who dwell in projectionless realms240 /
why create three paths?
4. Dhyanas and boundless states / samadhis devoid
of form / cessation of perception241 / these don’t exist
where there is only mind.”

XXII242
“As for icchantikas,243 Mahamati, if not icchantikas, who in
this world would liberate them?244 There are two kinds of
icchantikas, Mahamati,245 those who forsake good roots246 and
those whose vows regarding others are without limits.
“Mahamati, what is meant by forsaking good roots? This
refers to slandering the bodhisattva canon247 and falsely claiming
it is not in accord with the teachings of liberation in the sutras or
in the vinaya.248 Because they forsake their good roots, they
don’t enter nirvana.
“Next are bodhisattvas whose practice includes the vow not
to enter nirvana until all beings enter nirvana. However,
Mahamati, what they mean by entering nirvana is characterized
by not entering nirvana. Thus, they, too, follow the icchantika
path.”
Mahamati asked, “Bhagavan, then which of these never
enters nirvana?”
The Buddha replied, “Mahamati, bodhisattva icchantikas.
They know that everything is already in nirvana. Thus, they
never enter nirvana. This is not true of those icchantikas who
forsake their good roots. Mahamati, even though they forsake
their good roots, through the power of the tathagatas, at some
point their good roots reappear. And how so? Because

tathagatas do not forsake any being. This is why bodhisattva
icchantikas do not enter nirvana.

XXIII249
“Moreover, Mahamati, bodhisattvas should be well
acquainted with the three modes of reality.250 And what are the
three modes of reality? Imagined reality, dependent reality, and
perfected reality.
“Mahamati, imagined reality arises from appearances. And
how does imagined reality arise from appearances?251
Mahamati, as the objects and forms of dependent reality appear,
attachment results in two kinds of imagined reality. These are
what the tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones
describe as ‘attachment to appearance’ and ‘attachment to
name.’ Attachment to appearance involves attachment to
external and internal entities, while attachment to name involves
attachment to the individual and shared characteristics of these
external and internal entities.252 These are the two kinds of
imagined reality. What serves as the ground and objective
support253 from which they arise is dependent reality.
“And what is perfected reality? This is the mode that is free
from name or appearance or from projection. It is attained by
buddha knowledge and is the realm where the personal
realization of buddha knowledge takes place. This is perfected
reality and the heart of the tathagata-garbha.”254

1. “Name and appearance and projection / these
characterize two modes of reality / correct knowledge and
suchness / these characterize the perfected mode.”255
“Mahamati, this is what is known as the teaching of how to
view what characterizes the five dharmas and the modes of
reality.256 This is the realm where the personal realization of
buddha knowledge takes place and which you and other
bodhisattvas should cultivate.”257

XXIV258
“Furthermore, Mahamati, bodhisattvas should become adept
at examining the two kinds of phenomena that have no self. And
what are the two kinds of phenomena that have no self? Neither
beings nor dharmas have a self.
“And what does it mean that beings have no self? The
assemblage of the skandhas, the dhatus, or the ayatanas arises
from ignorance, karma, and desire and includes neither a self nor
anything that belongs to a self.259 As the grasping and
attachment of such senses as the eye to form give rise to
consciousness, bodies, houses260 and the world of objects that
are perceptions of one’s own mind are fabricated and
manifested from one’s own projections. They change and
disappear every moment, like a river or a seed or a candle or
the wind or a cloud. Restless like a monkey, attracted to
impurities like a fly, and insatiable like a windblown fire, they
move like a waterwheel, through life after life and bodily form
after bodily form, impelled by habit-energy without beginning,
like figures produced by some sort of magic trick or spell or
mechanical device. To be skilled in the knowledge of such
appearances means to know that beings have no self.
“And what does it mean to know that dharmas have no self?
It means to be aware that the self-existence of the skandhas,

dhatus, and ayatanas is imaginary, that the skandhas, dhatus, and
ayatanas are devoid of a self or anything that belongs to a self,
that the skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas are assemblages tied to
desire and karma and that they arise from the interplay of
conditions but are themselves passive,261 and that all dharmas
are like this. Through the power of imagination, fools give rise to
erroneous projections devoid of individual or shared
characteristics,262 but not the wise, because they transcend the
mind, the will and consciousness, the five dharmas, and the
modes of reality.263
“Mahamati, bodhisattvas should become adept at seeing no
self in anything at all. Bodhisattvas who become adept at seeing
no self in dharmas soon gain an insight into the freedom from
projections that characterizes the initial bodhisattva stage,264 and
they delight in examining the characteristics of such awareness.
As they continue their steady advance, they go beyond the ninth
stage to the dharma cloud stage,265 where they create huge lotus
flowers decorated with countless jewels and resembling jeweled
thrones on which they sit and practice in this realm of illusory
existence, and where they are joined by bodhisattvas of similar
attainment and their retinues. From every buddhaland, tathagatas
come and anoint their foreheads, just as a cakravartin266 anoints
the forehead of the crown prince. Having gone past the
bodhisattva stage, they attain the personal realization of the
realm of buddha knowledge. And because they see no self in
any dharma, they acquire the incomparable dharma body of a
tathagata. This is what no self in dharmas means. You and the
other bodhisattvas should cultivate this.”

XXV267
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please teach
us about assertion and denial so that I and the other
bodhisattvas can avoid these two pernicious views and quickly
attain unexcelled, complete enlightenment, and once enlightened,
we might avoid eternalistic assertions and nihilistic denials and
not slander the true Dharma.”
Upon hearing Mahamati Bodhisattva’s request, the Buddha
replied in verse:
1. “Assertions and denials / don’t exist where there is
only mind / as for the body, the world and possessions /
unable to see these are mind / and bereft of any wisdom /
fools assert and deny.”268
The Buddha then explained the meaning of this verse and told
Mahamati, “There are four kinds of assertion regarding what is
nonexistent. And what are the four? They include assertions of a
nonexistent characteristic, assertions of a nonexistent view,
assertions of a nonexistent cause, and assertions of a nonexistent
existence. These are the four kinds of assertion. As for denial,
this means denying what is asserted because it cannot be
grasped or observed. This is what is meant by assertion and
denial.
“Mahamati, as for the assertion of a nonexistent

characteristic, this refers to becoming attached to a nonexistent
individual or shared characteristic among the skandhas, the
dhatus, or the ayatanas as being like this and not other than
this.2691his is what is meant by the assertion of a nonexistent
characteristic. Such assertions of a nonexistent characteristic are
the result of attachment to the habit-energy of different mistaken
projections without beginning.
“Mahamati, as for the assertion of a nonexistent view, this
refers to asserting the view of a self, a person, a being, a life, or
an individuality among such entities as the skandhas, the dhatus,
or the ayatanas. This is what is meant by the assertion of a
nonexistent view.270
“Mahamati, as for the assertion of a nonexistent cause, this
refers to an original consciousness which does not arise from
causes that would render it unreal or illusory and which does not
subsequently arise by itself but only arises after eyes, form, light,
and memory arise. And once it exists, it ceases. This is what is
meant by the assertion of a nonexistent cause.271
“Mahamati, as for the assertion of a nonexistent existence,
this refers to attachment to assertions of the existence of what is
uncreated, such as space, cessation, or nirvana.272 These neither
exist nor do not exist. And any dharma that neither exists nor
does not exist is like the perception of a rabbit horn or a horse
horn or a strand of hair.273 It neither exists nor does not exist.
This is what is meant by assertions of a nonexistent existence.274
“Assertions and denials are the projections of fools unskilled
in examining what are nothing but perceptions of their own
minds. This is not true of the wise. Therefore, you should
practice avoiding the pernicious views of assertion and denial.

XXVI275
“Furthermore, Mahamati, once bodhisattvas have completely
fathomed the characteristics of the mind, the will and conceptual
consciousness, the five dharmas, the modes of reality, and the
two kinds of no-self, in order to help others, they appear in a
variety of guises, just as imagined reality is based on dependent
reality.276 And like magic gems that reflect every color, they
appear in every buddha assembly in every buddhaland, where
they hear teachings that transcend those of shravakas and
pratyeka-buddhas, teachings such as ‘all dharmas are like an
illusion, a dream, a shadow, or moonlight on the water,’ and
‘avoid the arising or cessation, the permanence or
impermanence of all dharmas.’
“And they enter hundreds of thousands of samadhis,
countless hundreds of thousands of samadhis. And as they do
so, they travel to other buddhalands and venerate other buddhas
and are reborn in celestial palaces, where they praise the three
treasures277 and appear as buddhas themselves surrounded by
assemblies of shravakas and bodhisattvas, and where they
liberate beings by explaining to them that what they perceive is
nothing but their own mind and that external existence does not
exist, thus enabling them to transcend such views as existence
and nonexistence.”

The Buddha then repeated the meaning of this in verse,
1. “The world as nothing but mind / this is what
bodhisattvas see / in different kinds of bodies / without the
slightest effort / they attain higher powers / self-masteries
and accomplishments.”278

XXVII279
Mahamati again asked the Buddha, “May the Bhagavan
please explain to us how all things are empty, non-arising, non-
dual, and devoid of self-existence so that once I and the other
bodhisattvas understand that they are empty, non-arising, non-
dual, and devoid of self-existence, we will be free of projections
of existence and nonexistence, and we will quickly realize
unexcelled, complete enlightenment.”280
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen closely and consider this
well. I will now explain this for you.”
Mahamati answered, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha began, “As for emptiness, Mahamati, emptiness
belongs to an imagined reality. Mahamati, it is to those who are
attached to an imagined reality that I speak of emptiness, non-
arising, non-duality, and the absence of self-existence.281
“Mahamati, briefly, there are seven kinds of emptiness:282 the
emptiness of characteristics, the emptiness of self-existence, the
emptiness of phenomena, the emptiness of non-phenomena, the
emptiness of ineffability, the great emptiness of the ultimate truth
of buddha knowledge, and the emptiness of mutual exclusion.
“What is meant by the emptiness of characteristics? The
emptiness of characteristics refers to the emptiness of the

individual or shared characteristics of whatever exists. Because
the observable distinctions of contrast and combination 283 are
nonexistent, neither individual nor shared characteristics arise.
And because the existence of this, that, or both together does
not exist, characteristics do not persist. Thus, I say the
characteristics of whatever exists are empty. This is what is
meant by the emptiness of characteristics.
“What is meant by the emptiness of self-existence? This refers
to the non-arising of something’s own existence. This is what is
meant by the emptiness of something’s self-existence. Thus I
speak of the emptiness of self-existence.
“What is meant by the emptiness of phenomena?284 This
refers to the lack of a self or anything that belongs to a self in the
skandhas, which arise due to the conjunction of causes and the
functioning of karma. This is what is meant by the emptiness of
phenomena.
“Mahamati, since phenomena are empty, it turns out
dependent reality is nonexistent.285 This is what is meant by the
emptiness of non-phenomena.
“What is meant by the emptiness of the ineffability286 of
things? This means that because imagined reality is devoid of
words, everything is ineffable. This is what is meant by the
emptiness of the ineffability of things.
“What is meant by the great emptiness of the ultimate truth of
buddha knowledge?287 This refers to the emptiness of the habit-
energy of all erroneous views upon attaining the personal
realization of buddha knowledge. This is what is meant by the
great emptiness of the ultimate truth of buddha knowledge.
“What is meant by the emptiness of mutual exclusion? This
refers to the emptiness of this not applying to that. This is what is

meant by the emptiness of mutual exclusion.288 For example,
Mahamati, if there are no elephants or horses, oxen or sheep in
Mrigaramatri Vihara but not no monks, and we say it is empty,
the vihara itself isn’t empty, and the monks themselves are not
empty, and it is not that elephants and horses are not present
elsewhere. This refers to the individual characteristics of things,
whereby one is not present in another. This is what is meant by
the emptiness of mutual exclusion. Among these seven kinds of
emptiness, the emptiness of mutual exclusion is the crudest kind
of emptiness289 and should be avoided.
“Mahamati, things do not give rise to themselves. This does
not mean they do not arise—unless one is in samadhi.290 This is
what is meant by non-arising. The absence of self-existence is
what is meant by non-arising. What lacks self-existence is
momentary and in continuous flux and manifests different states
of existence but without possessing any existence of its own.
Thus, whatever exists is devoid of self-existence.
“What does non-dual mean?291 This refers to everything
being cloudy or sunny, long or short, bright or dark.292
Mahamati, everything is non-dual. Samsara isn’t present in
nirvana, and nirvana isn’t present in samsara. This is because
their existence is due to their different characteristics.293 This is
what is meant by non-dual. And as with nirvana and samsara,
this is true of everything else. Therefore, you should cultivate
what is empty, non-arising, non-dual, and without self-
existence.”
The Bhagavan then repeated this in verse:
1. “I always teach emptiness / to transcend eternity
and annihilation / samsara is like an illusion or dream / but

karma is relentless
2. Space and nirvana / and two kinds of cessation /
fools create projections / the wise avoid what is or isn’t.”
The Bhagavan then told Mahamati, “The teaching of
emptiness, non-arising, non-duality, and the absence of self-
existence pervades all the sutras spoken by the buddhas. Every
sutra teaches these truths. But because every sutra responds to
the longings of beings, they differ as to how they express these
truths, which are not really in the words. Just as the sight of a
mirage confuses a herd of deer, whereby the deer imagine the
appearance of water where there is no water, likewise the
teachings of the sutras are meant to gladden people’s hearts. But
buddha knowledge is not to be found in the words. Therefore,
trust the meaning and don’t cling to the words.”

XXVIII294
Mahamati Bodhisattva then asked the Buddha, “In the sutras,
the Bhagavan says that the tathagata-garbha295 is intrinsically
pure, endowed with thirty-two attributes296 and present in the
bodies of all beings, and that, like a priceless jewel wrapped in
soiled clothing,297 the ever-present, unchanging tathagata-
garbha is likewise wrapped in the soiled clothing of the
skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas and stained with the stain of the
erroneous projections of greed, anger, and delusion,298 and that
this is what all buddhas teach. How is it that what the Bhagavan
says about the tathagata-garbha is the same as what followers of
other paths say about a self? Bhagavan, followers of other paths
also speak of an immortal creator without attributes,
omnipresent and indestructible. And they say this, Bhagavan, is
the self.”
The Buddha replied, “Mahamati, the tathagata-garba of
which I speak is not the same as the self mentioned by followers
of other paths. Mahamati, when I speak about the tathagata-
garbha, sometimes I call it ‘emptiness,’ ‘formlessness,’ or
‘intentionlessness,’ or ‘realm of reality,’ ‘dharma nature,’ or
‘dharma body,’ or ‘nirvana,’ ‘what is devoid of self-existence,’
or ‘what neither arises nor ceases,’ or ‘original quiescence,’ or
‘intrinsic nirvana,’ or similar expressions.299

“It is to put an end to the fear foolish beings have about the
expression ‘no self’ that the tathagatas, the arhats, the fully
enlightened ones proclaim the teaching of the tathagata-garbha
as a projectionless realm devoid of fabrications. Mahamati,
bodhisattvas of the present and the future should not become
attached to any view of a self.
“Take for example a potter who applies such things as manual
labor, water, a stick, a wheel, and a string to a lump of clay to
make different kinds of vessels. The Tathagata is also like this,
applying wisdom and a variety of skillful means to what has no
self and is free from projection. Sometimes I speak about the
tathagatagarbha and sometimes no self. Thus, the tathagata-
garbha of which I speak is not the same as the self spoken of by
followers of other paths. This is what is meant by the teaching of
the tathagata-garbha. The tathagata-garbha is taught to attract
those members of other paths who are attached to a self so that
they will give up their projection of an unreal self and will enter
the threefold gate of liberation300 and aspire to attain unexcelled,
complete enlightenment forthwith. This is why the tathagatas, the
arhats, the fully enlightened ones speak in this manner about the
tathagata-garbha. To speak otherwise would be to agree with
the followers of other paths. Therefore, Mahamati, in order to
avoid the views of followers of other paths, you should rely on
the selfless tathagata-garbha.”301

XXIX302
1. “A continuous person in the skandhas / conditions
and motes of dust / the creation of a powerful lord /
projections of nothing but mind.”303

XXX304
Thinking about beings in future ages, Mahamati asked the
Buddha, “Bhagavan, please tell us about the practices of
realization305 whereby bodhisattvas become great practitioners.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are four practices the
mastery of which enables bodhisattvas to become great
practitioners. And which four? Becoming adept at distinguishing
the perceptions of one’s own mind, perceiving the nonexistence
of external existence, avoiding views of arising, duration, and
cessation, and delighting 306 in the personal realization of buddha
knowledge. These are the four practices the mastery of which
enables bodhisattvas to become great practitioners.307
“And how do bodhisattvas become adept at distinguishing the
perceptions of their own minds? They regard the three realms
like this: as merely distinctions of the mind, devoid of a self or
what belongs to a self, as motionless and free from coming or
going, the result of the habit-energy of erroneous fabrications
without beginning, and the various forms and phenomena of the
three realms involving their body, their possessions, and the
world around them as perceptions of those fabrications. This is
how bodhisattvas become adept at distinguishing the
perceptions of their own minds.
“And how do bodhisattvas become adept at perceiving the

nonexistence of external existence? Since everything is a dream
or mirage, they regard the self-existence of everything that exists
as the result of the habit-energy of erroneous projections without
beginning. This is how bodhisattvas become adept at perceiving
the nonexistence of external existence.308
“And how do bodhisattvas become adept at avoiding views
of arising, duration, and cessation? Since whatever exists is like
an illusion or a dream and its existence does not arise from itself,
from another, or from a combination of both, but as a distinction
of one’s own mind, they therefore see external existence as
nonexistent, consciousness as not arising, and conditions as not
combining but arising due to projections. When they see that all
internal or external dharmas in the three realms cannot be
grasped and are devoid of self-existence, their views of arising
cease. And once they know that the self-existence of everything
is illusory, they attain the forbearance of non-arising. And once
they attain the forbearance of non-arising, they avoid views of
arising, duration, and cessation. This is how bodhisattvas
become adept at distinguishing and avoiding views of arising,
duration and cessation.309
“And how do bodhisattvas become adept at delighting in the
personal realization of buddha knowledge? Upon attaining the
forbearance of non-arising, they dwell at the eighth stage of the
bodhisattva path, where they are able to transcend
characteristics of the mind, will and consciousness, the five
dharmas, the modes of reality, and the two kinds of no-self, and
where they acquire a projection body.”310
Mahamati asked the Buddha,311 “Bhagavan, why is it called a
projection body?”
The Buddha replied, “Mahamati, the reason it is called a

projection body is because it travels quickly and without
obstruction, like a thought. Thoughts travel to other places
countless leagues away unobstructed by rock walls because of
the memory of something experienced in the past. And they
arise without interrupting the functioning of one’s mind or
interfering with one’s body. Mahamati, such projection bodies
are acquired at one and the same time. Endowed with higher
powers and spiritual masteries obtained in the Samadhi of the
Illusory, the different projection bodies of bodhisattvas appear
simultaneously, like unobstructed projections, in whatever realms
they recall having vowed to bring those beings to perfection who
delight in the personal realization of buddha knowledge.
“Thus do bodhisattvas attain the forbearance of non-arising
and dwell at the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path, where they
exchange the body characterized by the mind, will and
consciousness, the five dharmas, the modes of reality, and the
two kinds of no-self, for a projection body and become adept at
delighting in the personal realization of buddha knowledge.
“These are the four practices the mastery of which enables
bodhisattvas to become great practitioners and to which you
should devote yourselves.”

XXXI312
Mahamati once again asked, “Bhagavan, please tell us about
the causes and conditions of things so that once we are aware of
their characteristics, we bodhisattvas will avoid erroneous views
concerning their existence or nonexistence, and we will not
mistake their appearance as sequential or simultaneous.”313
The Buddha replied, “Mahamati, all things are characterized
by two kinds of conditions: namely, external and internal.
External conditions include such things as a lump of clay, a post,
a wheel, a piece of string, a stick, water, and manual techniques.
It is from the application of such conditions that a pot results. As
with a pot from clay, the application of conditions likewise
results in a rug from yarn, a mat from grass, a sprout from a
seed, and butter from milk. These are the before-and-after
results of external conditions.
“As for internal conditions, such things as ignorance, desire,
and karma constitute the conditions, while the skandhas, dhatus,
and ayatanas give rise to constitute the results of the conditions.
They aren’t separate, but this is how foolish people imagine
them. This is what is meant by internal conditions 314
“Mahamati, there are six kinds of causes: an immanent cause,
a connecting cause, a characterizing cause, an instrumental
cause, a manifesting cause, and an inactive cause.315 An

immanent cause produces internal and external effects as soon
as it becomes a cause. A connecting cause produces internal
and external effects as soon as it forms a connection, such as the
skandhas and seeds.316 A characterizing cause produces the
characteristic of an uninterrupted continuity. An instrumental
cause exerts supremacy like a cakravartin. A manifesting cause
manifests causes and effects whenever projections occur, just as
a lamp illuminates forms. And an inactive cause317 is the
absence of projection that occurs with the interruption of
continuity when something ceases.
“Mahamati, these are the projections of foolish people, and
they do not occur sequentially or simultaneously. And how so? If
they occurred simultaneously, there would be no difference
between cause and effect, and it would be impossible to identify
a cause. And if they occurred sequentially, it would be
impossible to identify an individual entity. The non-occurrence of
a sequential occurrence is like having no word for father in the
absence of children.
“Mahamati, it is not true that what occurs sequentially is a
continuity. It is merely a projection of what produces or what is
produced by direct, supporting, continuous, or contributing
causes.318 Mahamati, a sequential occurrence does not occur
because it is characterized by an attachment to an imagined
reality. It does not occur sequentially or simultaneously because
it belongs to the perceptions of your own mind. And it does not
occur sequentially or simultaneously, Mahamati, because the
individual or shared characteristics of an external existence do
not exist. It is only because you are unaware that the
perceptions of your own mind are projections that forms appear.
Therefore you should avoid views of a sequential or

simultaneous occurrence characterizing the operation of causes
and conditions.”
1. “Nothing arises from causes and conditions / nor
does anything cease / at the heart of ceasing and arising /
arise conceptions of causes and conditions
2. This isn’t to stop ceasing and arising / or the
continuity of causes and conditions / only to stop foolish
people / from misconceiving causation
3. Something existing or not due to causes / no such
thing occurs / the confusion of habit-energy / from this the
three realms appear
4. In truth nothing arises from causes / nor does
anything cease / regard conditioned things / like flowers in
the sky / let go deluded views / the grasping and the
grasped319
5. Nothing has arisen or ever will / nor do causes or
conditions exist / nothing exists at all / and these are nothing
but words.”

XXXII320
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please
explain for us the essential characteristics of word projection.
Bhagavan, once I and the other bodhisattvas understand the
essential characteristics of such projection and are able to
penetrate the two kinds of truth regarding words and what they
express,321 we will quickly attain unexcelled, perfect
enlightenment, and we will use the two kinds of truth regarding
words and what they express to free all beings from impurity.”
The Buddha replied, “Mahamati, listen carefully and ponder
this well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati said, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are four kinds of word
projection: object words, dream words, words for attachment
to mistaken projections, and words for projections without
beginning.322
“Object words arise from attachment to the projection of
forms and characteristics. Dream words arise from recollecting
previously experienced realms that upon waking are found to be
nonexistent. Words for attachment to mistaken projections arise
from recollecting previous acts of hostility.323 And words for
projections without beginning arise from the habit-energy of the

seeds of past attachments to beginningless projections. This is
what characterizes the four kinds of word projection.”

XXXIII324
Mahamati once more beseeched the Buddha to explain the
meaning of this, “Bhagavan, please tell us again about the realm
in which word projection occurs. Bhagavan, where and why and
how and based on what do beings give rise to their projection of
words?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Sounds are produced by the
conjunction of the head, chest, throat, nose, lips, tongue, and
teeth.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, are words and
projections separate or not separate?”
The Buddha replied, “Words and projections are neither
separate nor not separate. And how so? Because the one is the
cause of the other.325 Mahamati, if words and projections were
separate, projections could not be their cause. And if they were
not separate, words could not express their meaning. But they
do. Hence, they are not separate and not not separate.”
Mahamati again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, are words
ultimate truth? Or is what they express ultimate truth?”
The Buddha replied, “Mahamati, words are not ultimate truth,
nor is what they express ultimate truth. And how so? Ultimate
truth is what buddhas delight in. And what words lead to is
ultimate truth. But words are not ultimate truth. Ultimate truth is

what is attained by the personal realization of buddha
knowledge. It is not a realm known by means of the projection
of words. Therefore, the projection of words does not express
ultimate truth.
“Words arise and cease and shift, with their occurrence
depending on changing causes and conditions. Mahamati, what
depends on changing causes and conditions for its occurrence
does not express ultimate truth. Mahamati, because of the
nonexistence of their own characteristics or of those of
something else, words do not express ultimate truth. Moreover,
Mahamati, because any characteristic of an external existence
does not exist except as a perception of one’s own mind, the
projection of words does not express ultimate truth. Hence,
Mahamati, you should avoid the projection of words.”

XXXIV326
1. “Whatever exists has no self-existence / the same
is true of words / the profound truth of the emptiness of
emptiness / is something fools don’t know
2. The self-existence of what exists / and the words I
teach are like shadows / to those who realize buddha
knowledge themselves / I teach ultimate reality.”327

XXXV328
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please tell us,
how do we transcend sameness, difference, both and neither,
existence, nonexistence, and neither existence nor nonexistence,
permanence and impermanence,329 which is not practiced by
followers of other paths but which is the practice of the personal
realization of buddha knowledge? And how do we get free of
the individual and shared characteristics of projection? And how
do we accord with the truth of ultimate reality and the sequence
of stages marked by increasing purification that lead to the
tathagata stage, where one’s effortless resolve, like a magic gem
that reflects every color, displays realms without limit, but where
everything displayed is distinguished as a perception of one’s
own mind? And how do we and other bodhisattvas avoid views
of the individual or shared characteristics of such an imagined
reality and quickly attain unexcelled, perfect enlightenment and
enable other beings to achieve complete happiness and
contentment?”
The Buddha replied, “It is excellent, Mahamati, excellent, that
you are able to ask me about the meaning of such things for the
happiness of the many, for the welfare of the many, out of
compassion for all gods and humans.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder it

well, and I will clarify and explain this for you.”
Mahamati said, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha said, “Mahamati, foolish people cling to internal
and external existence due to the habit-energy of their
attachments to projections of the self-existence of sameness or
difference or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or
neither existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or
impermanence, unaware they are nothing but their own mind.
“Mahamati, it is like when deer are oppressed by thirst, and
they see a shimmering mirage, and thinking it is water, they rush
foolishly toward it, unaware it isn’t water. In the same manner,
foolish people are infected by the habit-energy of beginningless
projections and fabrications and are inflamed by the fires of
greed, anger, and delusion. Delighting in worlds of form and
beholding their origination, duration, and cessation and clinging
to external and internal existence, they fall prey to grasping and
imagining conceptions of their sameness or difference or both or
neither, or of their existence or nonexistence or neither existence
nor nonexistence, or of their permanence or impermanence.
“It is like a city of gandharvas,330 which foolish people devoid
of wisdom imagine as a city but which is the appearance of the
habit-energy of their beginningless attachment to form and is
neither a city nor not a city. In the same manner, there are
followers of other paths who cling to views of sameness or
difference or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or
neither existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or
impermanence due to the habit-energy of their beginningless
attachment to fictions and who are thus unable to see them as
nothing but perceptions of their own minds.

“It is like when people dream331 they are in a place filled with
men and women, elephants and horses, carts and pedestrians,
towns and villages, orchards and forests, mountains and rivers,
ponds and lakes. And upon waking, they remember this.
Mahamati, what do you think? If these people don’t let go of the
memory of what they have previously dreamt, are they wise or
not?”
Mahamati replied, “They are not, Bhagavan.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “The same is true of foolish
people infected by erroneous views and the wisdom of followers
of other paths who do not realize their views of sameness or
difference or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or
neither existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or
impermanence are the dreamlike perceptions of their own
minds.
“It is like a landscape painting without height or depth332 in
which foolish people imagine height and depth. The same is true
of future followers of other paths full of the habit-energy of
erroneous views. Due to their views of sameness or difference
or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or neither
existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or impermanence,
they harm themselves and harm others, calling them nihilists for
maintaining the doctrines of non-arising and neither existence nor
nonexistence. Denying causation, they sever their good roots
and destroy the means to get free of impurity. Anyone who
seeks transcendence should keep away from them. Once those
who make such claims fall prey to views of self, other, or both
and projections of existence or nonexistence, they become
trapped in assertions and denials, and because of such mistaken
conceptions, they end up in one of the hells..

“It is like someone with defective vision who sees a strand of
hair and asks others if they see it. The strand of hair does not
actually exist. But neither does it not exist, because it is seen and
not seen. The same is true of the fantasies and longings of the
followers of other paths, which are based on views of sameness
or difference or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence
or neither existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or
impermanence, and with which they slander the true Dharma
and mislead themselves and others.
“It is like a wheel of fire that is not a wheel.333 Foolish people
imagine a wheel, but not the wise. In the same manner, the
fantasies and longings of the followers of other paths are based
on imagining whatever arises in terms of sameness or difference
or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or neither
existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or impermanence.
“It is like raindrops, which look like jewels.334 Fools and
those of little or no wisdom mistake them for gems and try to
grab them. But raindrops are neither gems nor not gems because
they are grasped and not grasped. Likewise, followers of other
paths infected by the habit-energy of false views and projections
regard what does not exist as arising and what exists due to
causes as ceasing.335
“Furthermore, Mahamati, there are those conversant with the
three means to knowledge336 or the five-part syllogism337 who
imagine that there is something in the personal realization of
buddha knowledge that exists apart from the two modes of
reality.338 Mahamati, those who transform their mind, will, and
conceptual consciousness put an end to the projections of
grasping and grasped that are perceptions of their own minds.
But those who cultivate the personal realization of buddha

knowledge of the tathagata stage do not think of it as existing or
not existing. If those who cultivate should develop a perception
of the existence or nonexistence of such a realm, they would
perceive an individuality, a self, or a person.
“Mahamati, any teaching involving the self-existence of
individual or shared characteristics is the teaching of an
apparition buddha, not the teaching of a real buddha. Moreover,
all their teachings arise from the views and longings of foolish
beings and are not for establishing teachings of another reality or
for indicating the bliss of the samadhi attained by those who
dwell in the personal realization of buddha knowledge.
“It is like the appearance of a tree’s reflection in water,339
which is not a reflection and not not a reflection, and which does
not resemble a tree and does not not resemble a tree. In the
same way, those who are infected by the habit-energy of
heterodox views and attached to projections of sameness or
difference or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or
neither existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or
impermanence would not know that these are nothing but the
perceptions of their own minds.
“It is like a clear mirror that shows all the shapes and images
before it without discriminating among them.340 They are not
images and not not images. But they are seen as images or not
depending on whether foolish people discriminate them as such.
In the same way, the misconceptions of the followers of other
paths appear as images of their own minds, which they
discriminate and cling to based on their views of sameness or
difference or both or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or
neither existence nor nonexistence, or of permanence or
impermanence.

“It is like the sounds made when water and wind come
together.341 They neither exist nor do not exist. In the same way,
the misconceptions and projections of followers of other paths
are based on views of sameness or difference or both or neither,
or of existence or nonexistence or neither existence nor
nonexistence, or of permanence or impermanence.
“It is like the heat waves that flow like rivers or well up like
clouds in places barren of vegetation.342 They neither exist nor
do not exist depending on the existence or not of thirst. The
same is true of the ignorant. Infected by the habit-energy of
beginningless fabrications, they imagine the sameness or
difference or both or neither, or the existence or nonexistence or
neither existence nor nonexistence, or the permanence or
impermanence of origination, duration, and cessation as the
knowledge of reality known to buddhas,343 just like heat waves.
“It is like when someone uses incantations to make something
move that isn’t alive,344 or when something controlled by a
pishaca345 moves and foolish people attached to the projection
of movement say it exists. In the same way, the misconceptions
and longings of followers of other paths are based on views of
sameness or difference or both or neither, or of existence or
nonexistence or neither existence nor nonexistence, or of
permanence or impermanence. But they are attachments to
fictions and not founded on anything real.
“Therefore, Mahamati, those who would attain the personal
realization of buddha knowledge should abandon346 all views
and projections concerning the sameness or difference or both
or neither, or concerning the existence or nonexistence or neither
existence nor nonexistence, or concerning the permanence or
impermanence of origination, duration, and cessation.”


1. “An illusion, a dream, the reflection of a tree in
water / a strand of hair, a shimmering mirage / who views
the three realms like this / finally attains liberation347
2. Just as the sight of a mirage / bewilders the mind as
it shimmers / deer imagine water / where no water actually
exists
3. Likewise seeds of consciousness348 / shimmer in
the visible world / fools give rise to projections / as if they
were looking through cataracts
4. Through birth and death without beginning /
attached to grasping existence / removing one wedge with
another / they renounce their desire to grasp
5. Like something that moves by magic / a cloud, a
dream, or lightning / such insight results in liberation / and
severs the three continuities forever349
6. There is no creator inside / things resemble a
mirage in the sky350 / once you know they’re like this /
there isn’t anything known
7. Designations are merely names / devoid of
characteristics / but from them come projections / the
skandhas are like strands of hair
8. Like strands of hair or paintings / illusions or
dreams or gandharvan cities / shimmering mirages or
wheels of fire / beings who don’t exist are thus perceived
9. Permanence or impermanence, sameness or
difference / both of these or neither / the mistaken
projections of fools / continuities without beginning
10. In water, a mirror, or an unclouded eye / in a

miraculous jewel / countless forms are seen / none of which
are real
11. Whatever exists appears / like a painting or a
shimmering mirage / all the forms that are seen / are like a
dream in which nothing is real.”

XXXVI351
“Moreover, Mahamati, the teaching of the tathagatas is free
from the four possibilities352 of sameness or difference or both
or neither, or of existence or nonexistence or neither existence
nor nonexistence, or of permanence or impermanence and also
free from projections of assertion or denial of existence or
nonexistence. What the tathagatas chiefly teach are the truths of
the scriptures, dependent origination, the path, cessation, and
liberation.353 Their teaching does not include a self-existence or
a supreme lord or a spontaneous cause or minute particles or
temporal periods or a continuously existing entity. Furthermore,
Mahamati, it is in order to eliminate the twin obstructions of
passion and knowledge that they put forth the series of 108
projection-free statements354 and distinguish the characteristics
of the various paths and stages,355 as if they were caravan
chiefs.356

XXXVII357
“Moreover, Mahamati, there are four kinds of meditation.
And what are the four? They include beginner meditation,
meditation on meaning, meditation on suchness, and tathagata
meditation.
“What is meant by beginner meditation? This refers to what
shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, and followers of other paths
practice, which is to focus primarily on meditating on the
nonexistence of a personal self among the individual and shared
characteristics of their bodily frame, on its impermanence, its
suffering, and its impurity. Meditating on no other characteristics
than these, they proceed from one to the next but without
eliminating such characteristics.358 This is what is meant by
beginner meditation.
“And what is meant by meditation on meaning?359 Given the
absence of a self among the individual or shared characteristics
of persons and the nonexistence of a self, an other, or both as
taught by heterodox sects, this refers to meditating on the
absence of a self among dharmas and on the meaning of the
characteristics of the stages through which one steadily
advances. This is what is meant by meditation on meaning.
“And what is meant by meditation on suchness?360 This refers
to the projection of the projection of the two kinds of no-self361

and the projection of the non-arising of suchness. This is what is
meant by meditation on suchness.
“And what is meant by tathagata meditation? This refers to
enjoying the threefold bliss362 that characterizes the personal
realization
of
buddha
knowledge
and
to
performing
inconceivable deeds on behalf of other beings upon reaching the
tathagata stage. This is what is meant by tathagata meditation.”
1. “Meditation practiced by beginners / meditation on
the meaning of characteristics / meditation based on
suchness / or the pure meditation of the tathagatas
2. On such shapes as the sun or moon / or a lotus in
the depths of hell363 / or space after the fire364 / thus do
practitioners contemplate
3. A myriad of objects such as these / fill the
meditations of other schools / and those trapped in the
realms / of shravakas or pratyeka-buddhas
4. Those who abandon these / are thereby free of
projections / buddhas come from every land / with hands
beyond conception / and touch their heads as one / and
lead them into suchness.“365

XXXVIII366
Mahamati Bodhisattva then addressed the Buddha, “As for
entering nirvana, Bhagavan, what is meant by ‘nirvana?’”
The Buddha replied, “Witnessing the transformation of the
habit-energy of self-existence of the repository consciousness,
the will, and conceptual consciousness, this is what is meant by
nirvana. The nirvana of other buddhas and myself is the realm
that is empty of self-existence.
“Moreover, Mahamati, nirvana is the realm of the personal
realization ofbuddha knowledge. It is free from the existence or
nonexistence of projections of permanence or impermanence.
And why is it not permanent? Because projections of individual
or shared characteristics are impermanent. Therefore it is not
permanent.367 And why is it not impermanent? Because it is the
personal realization attained by all sages of the past, the present,
and the future. Therefore it is not impermanent.368
“Mahamati, nirvana is not annihilation or death. If nirvana
were death, there would be the continuity of something reborn.
And if nirvana were annihilation, it could be characterized as
something created.369 Therefore, nirvana is free from annihilation
and free from death. This is why it is the refuge of practitioners.
“Moreover, Mahamati, nirvana isn’t lost, and it isn’t found. It
isn’t impermanent, and it isn’t permanent. It doesn’t have one

meaning, and it doesn’t have multiple meanings.370 This is what
is meant by nirvana.
“Furthermore, Mahamati, the nirvana of shravakas and
pratyeka-buddhas consists in an awareness of individual and
shared characteristics, in avoiding contact, in an end to
delusions, and in not giving rise to projections.371 This is their
idea of nirvana.

XXXIX372
“Moreover, Mahamati, there are two kinds of self-existence.
And what are they? Attachment to the self-existence of words
and attachment to the self-existence of objects. Attachment to
the self-existence of words comes from attachment to the habit-
energy of word projections without beginning. Attachment to the
self-existence of objects comes from not realizing that the
distinctions that arise are perceptions of one’s own mind.

XL373
“Moreover, Mahamati, the tathagatas employ two kinds of
powers374 for the support of bodhisattvas who come before
them for instruction. And which two supporting powers? The
power to appear in bodily form and speak to those in samadhi
and the power to anoint their foreheads.375
“Mahamati, by relying on these powers of the buddhas,
bodhisattvas at the initial bodhisattva stage enter what is known
as the Light of the Mahayana Samadhi.376 Once they enter this
samadhi, buddhas from worlds throughout the ten directions
appear in bodily form and speak to them by means of these
powers, as they did to Vajragarbha Bodhisattva377 and to other
bodhisattvas of similar virtue and accomplishment.
“Mahamati, the power of the samadhi attained by these
bodhisattvas at the initial bodhisattva stage is a result of the good
roots they have cultivated and accumulated over the course of a
hundred thousand kalpas. As they work their way through the
easy and difficult378 aspects of the various stages, they finally
reach the dharma cloud stage,379 where they dwell inside a
magnificent lotus flower palace seated upon a jeweled lotus
flower throne surrounded by a retinue of their fellow
bodhisattvas adorned with necklaces of jewels that shine like the

sun or moon or golden champaka flowers.380 The great victors
of the ten directions then appear before their thrones in this lotus
flower palace and anoint their foreheads, just as Shakra381 or a
cakravartin might anoint the forehead of a crown prince.382 This
is what is meant by the power to anoint the foreheads of
bodhisattvas. Mahamati, this is what is meant by the two powers
that support bodhisattvas. Bodhisattvas who rely on these two
powers will meet the tathagatas. Otherwise, they will not.
“Moreover, Mahamati, all the special abilities of bodhisattvas
regarding samadhi and teaching depend on these two powers of
the tathagatas. Mahamati, if bodhisattvas could teach without the
supporting powers of the tathagatas, fools could do so too. And
why don’t they? Because they aren’t supported by these
powers.
“Mahamati, when tathagatas enter a city, due to their great
powers, music comes forth spontaneously from instruments as
well as from hills and rocks and trees and from city walls and
palaces, not to mention from sentient beings, as those who are
deaf, blind, and mute are liberated from countless forms of
suffering—such are the limitless powers of the tathagatas to help
others.”
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, why do the
tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones bestow their
powers of support when bodhisattvas are in samadhi and anoint
their foreheads during the higher stages?”
The Buddha replied, “Mahamati, the tathagatas, the arhats,
the fully enlightened ones use their powers to support
bodhisattvas so that they are not troubled by demons and do not
fall into the trances of shravakas and so that they will attain the
personal realization of the tathagata stage and so that their

attainments will increase. If they did not use their powers to
support them, they might fall prey to the misconceptions and
projections of followers of other paths or to the longings of
shravakas and demons and not attain unexcelled, perfect
enlightenment. Therefore, all tathagatas use their powers to
protect bodhisattvas.”
1. “The noblest of those with higher powers / vow to
purify everyone / their samadhis and their foreheads / from
the initial stage to the tenth.”383

XLI384
Mahamati again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, when the
Buddha speaks of dependent origination,385 he speaks of
causes and conditions and does not speak of a self.386
Bhagavan, followers of other paths also speak of causes and
conditions, namely, that whatever exists arises as a result of a
supreme deity or force, or time, or minute particles. When the
Bhagavan says whatever exists arises as a result of causes and
conditions, is his position the same or different?
“Bhagavan, followers of other paths say what exists comes
from what exists or what does not exist, while the Bhagavan
says what exists comes from what does not exist, and once it
arises, it ceases. According to the Bhagavan, ignorance is the
condition of memory and so on up to old age and death.387 But
this, Bhagavan, is a teaching of no causes, not a teaching of
causes. The teaching established by the Bhagavan goes like this:
‘Because this exists, that exists.’388 It does not acknowledge a
gradual existence.389 The teaching of other schools would
appear to be superior, not that of the Tathagata. And how so?
Because according to other schools, Bhagavan, the cause does
not arise from conditions but gives rise to what exists.390
Whereas the Bhagavan says the effect is discernable in the

cause, and the cause is discernable in the effect,391 which
confuses causes and conditions and which thus forms an endless
circle.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “I do not teach that there are no
causes, nor do I confuse causes and conditions, rather ‘because
this exists, that exists,’ the nonexistence of what grasps and what
is grasped, and the awareness that these are nothing but
perceptions of one’s own mind. Mahamati, as long as people
cling to what grasps or what is grasped and are unaware that
these are nothing but perceptions of their own mind, it is they
who mistake the existence or nonexistence of external objects,
not my teaching of dependent origination. I have always taught
that things arise due to the conjunction of causes and conditions
not that they arise without a cause.”

XLII392
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, is it not
because words exist that things exist? Bhagavan, if nothing
existed, words would not arise. Therefore, Bhagavan, it is
because words exist that things exist.”393
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Words are created even when
things don’t exist. Among the words that appear nowadays are
‘rabbit horns’ and ‘tortoise hair.’394 Mahamati, these do not
exist and do not not exist. They are merely words. Your
contention that because words exist things exist is faulty.
“Nor, Mahamati, do words exist in every world. Words are
simply fabrications. In other buddhalands, the Dharma is
expressed by staring or by facial expressions, or by lifting the
eyebrows, or by blinking the eyes, or by smiling, or by opening
the mouth, or by clearing the throat, or by thinking about
something, or by nodding. For example, Mahamati, in the
worlds of Unblinking Eyes or Gathered Fragrances395 or in the
land of Samatabhadra Tathagata,396 a simple stare enables
bodhisattvas to attain the forbearance of non-arising and
incomparable samadhis. Therefore, the existence of words does
not mean the existence of things. Mahamati, in this world such
creatures as mosquitoes and gnats and ants and bugs all conduct
their lives without words.”

1. “Just as space or rabbit horns / or a barren
woman’s child / do not exist except as words / such are the
projections of existence
2. Where causes and conditions meet / fools give rise
to projections / unable to fathom what is real / they wander
through the Inn of Three Realms.”397

XLIII398
Mahamati Bodhisattva then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan,
why is speech said to be eternal?”399
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Because of delusion.400
Delusions also appear to the wise, but they aren’t confused by
them. Mahamati, such things as shimmering mirages, firebrands,
strands of hair, cities of gandharvas, illusions, dreams, and
reflections confuse worldly people, but not the wise. It is not that
these don’t appear, Mahamati—all kinds of delusions appear,
but it is not the case that delusions are not eternal. And how so?
Because they neither exist nor do not exist.
“And how is it, Mahamati, that delusions neither exist nor do
not exist? Because the realms of foolish beings are different. For
example, because pretas see and do not see the Ganges, it does
not exist as a delusion.401 But because it appears to others, it
does not not exist. Likewise, the wise are neither confused nor
not confused by delusions. Thus, because their characteristics
are not destroyed, delusions are eternal. Mahamati, it is not the
different characteristics of delusions but the characteristics of
projections that are destroyed. Thus, delusions are eternal.
“And how is it, Mahamati, that delusions are real?402 For the
reason that the wise do not give rise to the thought of being
confused or the thought of not being confused by a delusion.

Not only the wise, Mahamati, but if anyone gives rise to the
slightest perception of a delusion, it does not qualify as buddha
knowledge. Mahamati, anything about its existence is the
mistaken talk of fools and not the talk of the wise.
“Whether delusions are imagined as confusion or not, they
give rise to two lineages: the lineage of fools and the lineage of
the wise, with the lineage of the wise being further divided
among a shravaka path, a pratyeka-buddha path, and a buddha
path.
“And how do the projections of the ignorant give rise to
membership in the shravaka path? Membership in the shravaka
path is the result of attachment to individual and shared
characteristics. This is how projections give rise to membership
in the shravaka path.
“Mahamati, as for how the projections of delusion give rise to
membership in the pratyeka-buddha path, membership in the
pratyeka-buddha path is the result of attachment to aversion to
the individual and shared characteristics of delusions.
“And as for the wise, and how delusions give rise to
membership in the buddha path, membership in the buddha path
is the result of the awareness of perceptions as nothing but one’s
own mind, of external existence as nonexistent, and of the non-
projection of characteristics. This is how delusions give rise to
membership in the buddha path.403
“Meanwhile, when people misperceive the existence of
different objects, this gives rise to membership in the lineage of
fools. Maintaining that this object does not exist or that object
does not not exist, this is what is meant by this lineage.
“But when delusions are not projected, Mahamati, the wise
are able to transform the existence of the habit-energy of the

mind, the will and consciousness, the modes of reality, and the
dharmas into what is called suchness.404 Thus is it said:
‘suchness is the mind set free.’ And to make it clearer, I say ‘to
be free of projections means to be free of all projections.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, do delusions exist
or not?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “They are like illusions. There is
nothing to grasp. If a delusion had something that could be
grasped, the existence of grasping would never cease, and
dependent origination would amount to creation by causes and
conditions, as claimed by followers of other paths.”405
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “If a delusion is like an illusion,
can it serve as the cause of other delusions?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “An illusion is not the cause of a
delusion because it does not give rise to misperception.
Mahamati, an illusion does not give rise to misperception
because it does not involve projection. Mahamati, illusions are
produced by magic and not by the habit-energy of projections
or misperceptions. Thus, they do not give rise to misperception.
Mahamati, it is the minds of fools that become attached to
delusions, not those of the wise.”
1. “The wise don’t see delusions / with anything real
inside them / if there was something real inside / delusions
would be real
2. If delusions are abandoned / and something should
appear / it would be another delusion / a defect like a
cataract.”406

XLIV407
“Moreover, Mahamati, in viewing everything as an illusion, if
not for illusions, there would be nothing to compare things
to.”408
Mahamati said, “Bhagavan, do you say things are illusory
because of attachment to illusory characteristics or because of
attachment to something else? If everything that exists was
illusory
because
of
attachment
to
different
illusory
characteristics, Bhagavan, something would exist that wasn’t
illusory.409 And how so? Because the different characteristics of
a form have no cause. Bhagavan, it is the appearance of the
different uncaused characteristics of a form that is illusory.
Therefore, Bhagavan, it isn’t attachment to different illusory
characteristics that makes things seem illusory.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It isn’t because of attachment to
different illusory characteristics that makes everything seem
illusory. Rather, Mahamati, it is because everything is unreal and
vanishes as fast as lightning. This is why it is illusory. Like
lightning, Mahamati, it appears but for a moment. And as soon
as it appears, it disappears. But this is not how things appear to
foolish people, who observe everything in terms of the individual
and shared characteristics of their own projections. Since what
doesn’t exist doesn’t appear, they remain attached to the

characteristics of form.”
1. “If not an illusion what are things like / thus are they
called illusory / unreal and transient as lightning / thus are
they called illusory.”

XLV410
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “According to the
Bhagavan, everything is non-arising and illusory. But when he
says what is non-arising is illusory, is there not a contradiction in
the Bhagavan’s earlier and later statements?”411
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It is not true that when I say
what is non-arising is illusory there is a contradiction in my
earlier and later statements. And why not? Because what arises
does not arise. When you realize that whether something exists
or not is nothing but the perception of your own mind, its
external existence is seen as nonexistent and non-arising.
Mahamati, there is no contradiction in my earlier and later
statements.
“However, it is to refute the arising from causes of other
schools that I say everything is non-arising. Mahamati, the
confused members of other schools maintain the arising of
existence or nonexistence and deny that they are the result of
attachment to their own projections. Mahamati, because I deny
the arising of existence or nonexistence, I teach the teaching of
non-arising.
“Mahamati, I teach existence to refute the nihilistic view that
nothing exists and so that my disciples will accept samsara,412
so that they will accept that where they are reborn involves

differences in karma. Thus, I teach existence so that they will
accept samsara.413
“Mahamati, I teach the illusoriness of self-existence so that
they will get free of self-existence. But due to erroneous views
and hopes, foolish people are unaware that these are nothing but
the perceptions of their own minds. To refute arising from causes
and attachment to the self-existence of conditions and to prevent
foolish people from clinging to erroneous views and hopes
regarding what belongs to themselves and others and from
creating mistaken doctrines about how to see things as they
really are, I teach that the self-existence of everything is an
illusion and a dream. Mahamati, to see things as they really are
means to transcend 414 what are nothing but perceptions of your
own mind.”
1. “Non-arising means nonexistence / existence
includes samsara / who sees these as illusions / doesn’t
give rise to projections of form.”

XLVI415
“Moreover, Mahamati, I will explain the characteristics of
word, phrase, and letter units.416 For bodhisattvas who become
adept at examining the characteristics of word, phrase, and letter
units and at penetrating the meaning of word, phrase, and letter
units will quickly attain unexcelled, perfect enlightenment. And
once they are thus enlightened, they will enlighten others.
“Mahamati, as for a word unit, a word is established based
on an object. This is what is meant by a word unit. As for a
phrase unit, a phrase is a unit of meaning. It defines or
determines the self-existence of something. This is what is meant
by a phrase unit. As for a letter unit, it points to a word or
phrase. This is what is meant by a letter unit. Moreover, a letter
unit can be long or short, high or low.417 Also, a phrase unit is a
footprint. For example, a footprint left by a person or by an
animal like a horse or an elephant can be called a phrase unit.418
“Mahamati, as for words and letters, we use words to refer
to the four formless skandhas.419 Thus we speak of words. And
we use letters to point to their individual characteristics. Thus we
speak of letters. This is what is meant by word, phrase, and
letter units and why I say distinguishing the characteristics of
word, phrase, and letter units is something you all should
cultivate.”

1. “Distinguish units of letters / units of words and
phrases / people who foolishly cling to these / are like
elephants in a quagmire.”

XLVII420
“Moreover, Mahamati, in future ages those who are wise
might ask those who are not what I mean by ‘avoiding views
characterized by sameness, difference, both, or neither.’421 And
they might answer, ‘Whether form422 and so on are permanent
or not or whether they are different or not is not a proper
question.’423 Likewise, if they are asked to compare and
contrast the characteristics of nirvana and samskara,424
characteristics and what is characterized, qualities and what is
qualified, matter and what is made of matter,425 seeing and what
is seen, earth and dust, practice and practitioner, they might
answer, ‘The Buddha has declared these to be unanswerable.’
“But silence is something such foolish people would not
understand. It is because those present lack sufficient wisdom
that the tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones say
these are unanswerable to help them overcome fear. This is why
they don’t answer. Also, it is to put an end to the mistaken views
of other paths that they don’t respond.
“Mahamati, followers of other paths teach such unanswerable
propositions as, ‘Life is identical to the body.’426 Mahamati, this
is because these followers of other paths are bewildered by
causality. Unanswerable propositions are not what I teach. What
I teach, Mahamati, is getting free of what grasps and what is

grasped and not giving rise to projections. Why should I be
silent?
“However, Mahamati, when someone is attached to what
grasps or what is grasped and does not understand that these
are nothing but perceptions of their own minds, then I am silent.
Mahamati, the tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones
use four kinds of explanation to teach others. Mahamati, I
invariably use silence with those whose roots are not yet mature,
not with those whose roots are mature.”427

XLVIII428
“Moreover, Mahamati, whatever exists is neither created nor
does it arise from causes. There is no creator. Hence whatever
exists does not arise. And why, Mahamati, does whatever exists
have no self-existence? Because in the light of personal
realization, neither individual nor shared characteristics can be
found. Thus, I say whatever exists does not arise.
“Mahamati, why is it that whatever exists cannot be grabbed
or released? If you try to grab its individual or shared
characteristics, there is nothing to grab. And if you try to release
them, there is nothing to release. Thus, whatever exists cannot
be grabbed or released.
“Mahamati, why is it that whatever exists does not cease to
exist? Because no characteristics of its self-existence exist,
whatever exists cannot be found. Thus, whatever exists does not
cease to exist.
“Mahamati, how is it that whatever exists is impermanent?
Because once a characteristic appears, its impermanence
exists.429 This is why I say whatever exists is impermanent. And
how is it, Mahamati, that whatever exists is permanent? Because
once a characteristic appears, its non-arising exists.430 And
because its impermanence is permanent, I say everything is
permanent.“431

1. “For refuting the views of other paths / I use four
kinds of explanations / a direct answer or another question
/ analysis or silence
2. Whether life exists or doesn’t / for what is better
left to silence / Vaisheshika and Samkhya masters433 /
present their explanations
3. Examined by correct knowledge / self-existence
cannot be found / because it transcends words / I teach no
self-existence.”

XLIX434
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Please tell us about
srota-apannas and the different characteristics common to the
srota-apanna path so that by becoming versed in such
characteristics and by knowing how to differentiate the practices
of sakrid-agamins, an-agamins, and arhats, we bodhisattvas
might thus explain the Dharma to others, namely, the two kinds
of no-self and the elimination of the two obstructions.435 And as
we pass through the various stages until we finally reach the
inconceivable and ultimate realm of the tathagatas, we might
benefit all beings like multicolored, wish-fulfilling gems and
protect and nourish them with the infinite bodies and wealth of
the realm of all dharmas.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder this
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati replied, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
blessed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are three different levels
of srota-apannas and attainments of srota-apannas.436 And
what are the three? They are basic, intermediate, and advanced.
Those at the basic level are reborn seven more times at the
most. Those at the intermediate level are reborn three to five
more times before they attain nirvana. And those at the

advanced level attain nirvana in this life.
“For each of these three, there are three bondages: coarse,
intermediate, and subtle. And what are the three bondages?
They are belief in a body, doubt, and attachment to codes.437 In
terms of differences among these three bondages, whoever
reaches the subtlest of the advanced level becomes an arhat.
“Mahamati, there are two kinds of belief in a body: that which
is innate438 and that which is a projection, such as the
projections of dependent or imagined reality.439 For example,
the different attachments to an imagined reality arise in
dependence on a dependent reality. They neither exist, nor do
they not exist. And they neither exist nor do not exist and are not
real because they are projections. The projections of foolish
people are attached in different ways to an imagined reality, just
like thirsty deer imagine water when they see a shimmering
mirage. This is the view of the body imagined by srota-apannas,
who think that since persons have no self, by grasping its
nonexistence, they thereby put an end to their attachment to
beginningless ignorance.440
“Mahamati, as for the innate belief of srota-appanas in a
body, whether their own or others, because the four formless
skandhas along with form—which arises from matter and what
is made of matter—interact as the cause of each other, and
because the material elements and form do not combine, when
srota-apannas contemplate the non-appearance of what exists
or does not exist,441 their belief in a body comes to an end. And
once their belief in a body ends, their desires no longer arise.
This is what characterizes a strota-apanna’s belief in a body.
“Mahamati, as for what characterizes their doubt,442 because
they become adept at viewing the characteristics of dharmas,

and they have previously put an end to projections of the two
kinds of belief in a body, they do not give rise to doubts
regarding dharmas, nor do they give rise to views as to the
purity or impurity of other teachers. This is what characterizes a
srota-apanna’s elimination of doubt.
“Mahamati, as for their attachment to codes, how do srota-
apannas cease their attachment to codes? When they become
adept at seeing the suffering where they might be reborn, they
cease their attachment. Attachment, Mahamati, refers to how
foolish beings resolve to undertake ascetic practices for the sake
of attaining greater bliss. Hence, they seek rebirth. But when
they are not attached and turn instead toward undertaking those
practices and upholding those precepts that are free from
projection and passion and that lead to the peerless realm of
personal realization, this is what characterizes a srota-apanna’s
elimination of attachment to codes.
“Because srota-apannas sever these three bondages, desire
and delusion do not arise. However, if srota-apannas should
think ‘These bondages are not my doing,’ they will err in two
ways. They will end up believing in a body, and they will not
sever these bondages.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, the Bhagavan
speaks of many desires. Which desires do they put an end to?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “They do not give rise to the
different kinds of behavior involving love or the desire to
embrace women or to misdeeds involving the mouth or body
that give present pleasure but ensure future suffering. And how
do they do this? By attaining the bliss of samadhi. Thus, they put
an end to desires, but not the desire for nirvana.
“Mahamati, what characterizes sakrid-agamins?443 The

moment they see forms, they give rise to projections but not to
views about them. But because they are adept at contemplating
forms during meditation, the moment they return to this world,
their term of suffering ends, and they attain nirvana. This is what
constitutes a sakrid-agamin.
“Mahamati, what about an-agamins ?444 This refers to those
who give rise to visions of calamity regarding the existence or
nonexistence of past, present, or future forms. Because they
prevent projections from arising, and because they sever
bondages, they are called an-agamins.445
“Mahamati, as for arhats,446 this refers to those for whom
projections of meditations, samadhis or liberations, higher
powers or masteries, afflictions or sufferings do not exist.447
Hence, they are called arhats.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “The Bhagavan has said that
there are three kinds of arhats. To which kind is he referring
here? To those who attain the one path of tranquility, to those
who appear as arhats but who perform bodhisattva practices, or
to those who are the projections of apparition buddhas?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “To those shravakas who attain
the one path of tranquility and not to the others—‘the others’
referring to those who practice bodhisattva practices and those
who are the projections of apparition buddhas. As a result of
their vows and skillful means, they are reborn in the great
assemblies, where they add to the glory of the retinues of
buddhas.
“Mahamati, they teach different teachings concerning
attainment and meditation depending on the projections of each
place. But because they avoid the objects of meditation and the
one who meditates, they point instead to the characteristics of

attainment as nothing but perceptions of one’s own mind. This is
what they call attainment.
“Moreover, Mahamati, in order to get past the boundless and
formless
realms
of
meditation,448
you
should
avoid
characteristics that are nothing but perceptions of your own
mind. And it is not the case, Mahamati, that even the samadhi
involving the cessation449 of sensation and perception450 is
anything other than the perception of your own mind. And how
so? Because it is nothing but mind.”
1. “The four boundless meditations / the formless
samadhis / the cessation of sensation and perception / none
exist except as mind
2. The attainments of the srota-apanna / the sakrid-
agamin and an-agamin / also that of the arhat / all are
confusions of the mind451
3. Meditation, meditator, and object of meditation /
renunciation and beholding the truth / these are nothing but
projections / who knows this achieves liberation.”

L452
“Moreover, Mahamati, there are two kinds of knowing:453
knowing that examines and knowing that is based on attachment
to the characteristics of projection. 454 Mahamati, the knowing
that examines focuses on the characteristics of self-existence of
whatever exists and concludes that they are beyond the reach of
the four possibilities and not graspable. This is what is meant by
the knowing that examines.
“As for the four possibilities, Mahamati, this means to be
beyond the reach of sameness, difference, both or neither,
existence, nonexistence or neither existence nor nonexistence,
permanence
or
impermanence.
These
are
the
four
possibilities.455 Mahamati, everything that exists is beyond the
reach of these four possibilities. And you should practice
examining everything, Mahamati, according to them.
“Mahamati, what is the knowing that is based on attachment
to the characteristics of projection? Attachment to the
characteristics of projection refers to attachment to the
erroneous projection of solidity, moisture, warmth, and
movement as characterizing the four elements and attachment to
proposition, reason, characteristics, and example456 as the
foundation on which such falsehoods are based. This is what is
meant by the knowing that is based on attachment to the

characteristics of projection.
“This is what characterizes the two kinds of knowing. By
mastering what characterizes these two kinds of knowing,
bodhisattvas finally understand the absence of a self among
persons and things and understand the means by which to use
their projectionless knowing to examine the stages of practice.
As they reach the initial stage, they enter hundreds of samadhis.
And in certain of these samadhis, they see hundreds of buddhas
and bodhisattvas and events, hundreds of kalpas in the past and
future. And in the light of hundreds of buddha realms, they come
to know the characteristics of the higher stages. And by virtue of
their peerless vows and their masteries and higher powers, they
reach the personal realization of the tathagata stage where their
foreheads are anointed among dharma clouds.457 And with their
minds well focused on the ten inexhaustible vows,458 they bring
others to perfection and manifest themselves in a variety of
refulgent forms while enjoying the bliss of samadhi and the
personal realization of buddha knowledge.459

LI460
“Moreover, Mahamati, bodhisattvas should become versed in
the four elements and their elemental forms.461 And how should
bodhisattvas become versed in the four elements and their
elemental forms? Mahamati, bodhisattvas should know this: that
in reality the four elements do not arise. They should thus
examine the non-arising of the four elements. Once they have
done so, they will know that the distinguishing of names,
appearances, and projections462 is the distinguishing of
perceptions of their own mind and that their external existence
does not exist. This is what is meant by distinguishing projections
as perceptions of the mind. This means to see that the three
realms are devoid of the existence of the four elements and their
elemental forms, that they are completely devoid of the four
possibilities, and that they include no self or anything that
belongs to a self, and to focus instead on the essential
characteristic of reality, the essential characteristic of which
consists in non-arising.
“Mahamati, how do the four elements give rise to elemental
forms? The element distinguished as moisture produces internal
and external realms of water. The element distinguished as
energy produces internal and external realms of fire. The element
distinguished as movement produces internal and external realms

of wind. And the element distinguished as divisible form
produces internal and external realms of earth—and with form
comes space. According to those who cling to mistaken truths, it
is the four elements and their elemental forms that give rise to the
assemblage of the five skandhas.
“Mahamati, consciousness463 continues in another existence
because of the delight for different realms. As for earth and the
other elements and their elemental forms, Mahamati, the four
elements serve as its conditions,464 and the four elements do not
serve as its conditions. And how so? The elements do not arise
unless nature, shape, location, and function exist.465 But even if
they do arise together with nature, shape, location, and function,
Mahamati, they do not do so with regard to what is formless.466
Therefore, the four elements and their elemental forms are
projections of other paths and not mine.

LII467
“Moreover, Mahamati, I will now explain what characterizes
the self-existence of the skandhas. By ‘what characterizes the
self-existence of the skandhas,’ I mean the five skandhas. And
as to which five, I mean form, sensation, perception, memory,
and consciousness, four of which are formless, namely
sensation, perception, memory, and consciousness.
“Mahamati, by ‘form’ I am referring to the different
characteristics of each of the four elements and their elemental
forms. But it is not the case, Mahamati, that the formless ones
are actually four in number. They are like the sky. Just as the sky
is devoid of numbers or the characteristics of numbers, it is only
due to projection that we speak of one sky. Mahamati, the
skandhas are likewise devoid of numbers or the characteristics
of numbers and thus devoid of existence or nonexistence and
devoid of the four possibilities. Foolish beings talk in terms of
numbers, not the wise.
“Mahamati, to the wise, forms are illusory. They are
designations that are neither separate nor not separate, just as a
dream or shadow is neither separate nor not separate from a
person’s body. Mahamati, the realm of buddha knowledge
appears the same as the projections of the skandhas. This is
what is meant by what characterizes the self-existence of the

skandhas.468 You should get rid of projections.469 And once
you do, proclaim the teaching of detachment470 and in every
buddhaland put an end to the views of other schools. For once
you proclaim detachment, Mahamati, you will be freed from the
view of no self among dharmas, and you will reach the
unshakeable stage.471 And once you reach the unshakeable
stage, you will gain a mastery of countless samadhis and
projection bodies.472 And as you become fully versed in the
Samadhi of the Illusory, you will use your higher powers,
insights, and masteries to help and protect all beings. For just as
the earth supports everything that lives, so too do bodhisattvas
aid beings everywhere.

LIII473
“Moreover, Mahamati, according to followers of other paths,
there are four kinds of nirvana. And what are the four? They
include the nirvana in which the self-existence of what exists
does not exist, the nirvana in which the existence of
characteristics does not exist, the nirvana in which the awareness
of one’s own characteristics and self-existence does not exist,
and the nirvana in which the continuity of the individual and
shared characteristics of the skandhas ends.474 These are what
are meant by the four kinds of nirvana taught by followers of
other paths. They are not what I teach. What I teach, Mahamati,
is that nirvana is the cessation of the consciousness that
projects.”475
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “But does the Bhagavan not
put forward eight forms of consciousness?”
The Buddha answered, “Yes, I do.”
Mahamati asked again, “If so, then why does the Bhagavan
speak of getting free from conceptual consciousness476 and not
the seventh form of consciousness?”477
The Buddha replied, “Because, Mahamati, it is the cause and
the supporting condition whereby the seventh form of
consciousness does not arise.478 And it is the division and
attachment of conceptual consciousness regarding external

realms that produces the habit-energy that nourishes repository
consciousness.479 And it is the Will,480 together with its
attachment to a self and what belongs to a self and its reflection
on causes and conditions, that gives rise to the characteristics of
an indestructible body.481 And it is attachment to an external
world that is a perception of one’s own mind that is the cause
and supporting condition of the repository consciousness. Thus,
this system of consciousness482 arises through mutual causation.
It is like the ocean and its waves, which rise or cease as the
wind of externality that is a perception of one’s own mind blows.
Thus, when conceptual consciousness ceases, the seventh form
of consciousness also ceases.”
1. “Mine isn’t a nirvana that exists / a created one or
one with attributes / the consciousness that projects what
we know / the cessation of this is my nirvana
2. This is the cause and supporting condition /
whereby thoughts create the body / on this is what the
mind is based / on this is what consciousness depends483
3. When the great river quits flowing / waves no
longer stir / when conceptual consciousness ceases / the
other forms don’t rise.”

LIV484
“Moreover, Mahamati, I will now explain the different
characteristics common to imagined reality.485 By becoming
versed in distinguishing the different characteristics common to
imagined reality, you and the other bodhisattvas will be able to
free yourselves from projections and attain the personal
realization of buddha knowledge and an insight into the paths of
other practitioners. You will also understand how to put an end
to projections of grasping and what is grasped and no longer
project an imagined reality upon the various characteristics of
dependent reality.
“Mahamati, what are the different characteristics common to
imagined reality? They include the projection of words, the
projection of the objects of words, the projection of
characteristics, the projection of value, the projection of self-
existence, the projection of causes, the projection of views, the
projection of reasoning, the projection of arising, the projection
of non-arising, the projection of continuity, and the projection of
bondage
and
emancipation.
These
are
the
different
characteristics of imagined reality.486
“Mahamati, what is the projection of words? This refers to
attachment to the pleasure from the various sounds of beautiful
speech and song. This is what is meant by the projection of

words.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of the objects of words?
This refers to how the projection of words arises in dependence
on the self-existence of the objects of words and on what is
realized by buddha knowledge.487 This is what is meant by the
projection of the objects of words.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of characteristics? This
refers to the projection of the existence of characteristics such as
solidity, moisture, warmth, and movement488 onto the objects of
words to which one is attached as if to a mirage. This is what is
meant by the projection of characteristics.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of value? This refers to
delight in such precious things as gold, silver, and gemstones.
This is what is meant by the projection of value.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of self-existence? This
refers to the mistaken projection of the self-existence of
something as being like this and not like anything else. This is
what is meant by the projection of self-existence.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of causes? This refers to
the appearance of the characteristics of causation based on the
projection of the existence or nonexistence of causes and
conditions. This is what is meant by the projection of causes.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of views? This refers to the
projection of erroneous views of existence or nonexistence, or
of sameness or difference or both or neither, which followers of
other paths imagine and cling to. This is what is meant by the
projection of views.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of reasoning? This refers to
arguments whose logic and conclusions involve conceptions of a
self or what belongs to a self. This is what is meant by the

projection of reasoning.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of arising? This refers to
attachment to the arising of something whether or not causes
exist. This is what is meant by the projection of arising.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of non-arising? This refers
to the non-arising of whatever exists being due to the non-
functioning of causation and the arising of entities that have no
cause.489 This is what is meant by the projection of non-arising.
“Mahamati, what is the projection of continuity? This refers to
something that continues between one thing and another, like a
golden thread.490 This is what is meant by the projection of
continuity.491
“Mahamati, what is the projection of bondage and
emancipation? This refers to attachment to causes and
conditions that bind or unbind, as when a person attempts to tie
or untie something. This is what is meant by the projection of
bondage and emancipation.492
“These are the different characteristics common to imagined
reality to which all foolish beings are attached as existing or not
existing.
“Mahamati, what those attached to dependent reality are
attached to is the self-existence of the projections of the objects
to which they are attached. Although they appear like so many
illusory entities, foolish beings imagine them as different from
illusions. Mahamati, the illusions and the objects are neither
separate nor not separate. If they were separate, the illusions
would not be the cause of the objects. If they were not separate,
the illusions and the objects would be indistinguishable. But they
are distinguishable. Hence, they are neither separate nor not
separate. Therefore, Mahamati, you and the other bodhisattvas

should not become attached to whether the illusions of
dependent and imagined reality are separate or not or whether
they exist or not.”493

LV494
1. “When the mind is tied to external realms /
knowledge is subject to speculation / where freedom from
projection prevails / impartial wisdom rises
2. What exists in imagined reality / in dependent
reality doesn’t / imagined reality is what is grasped /
dependent reality is not imagined
3. Where a myriad distinctions arise / like illusions
they aren’t real / where characteristics multiply / because
they’re projections they aren’t perfect
4. Characteristics are mistakes / rising from a mind in
bondage / projections of what isn’t known / based on
dependent reality495
5. What exists in imagined reality / is simply
dependent reality / projections of all kinds / based on
dependent reality
6. There’s conventional truth and ultimate truth / and a
third that denies causation496 / projections refer to
conventional truth / their cessation is the realm of sages
7. Like someone who contemplates / who perceives
a multitude in one / where no multitude exists / this is what
projections resemble

8. Like someone with cataracts / who imagines
different forms / which neither are nor aren’t cataracts /
dependent reality is thus mistaken
9. Like gold that has been refined / free of dross and
impurities / the sky without a cloud / imagined reality
purified497
10. Imagined reality doesn’t exist / dependent reality
does / assertions and denials / by projections are undone
11. If imagined reality doesn’t exist / and dependent
reality does / if one doesn’t and the other does / from what
doesn’t comes what does498
12. Thus is dependent reality / based upon projection
/ from which name and appearance follow / giving rise to
more projections
13. Though they remain unperfected / once you get
past all projections / knowledge is thus purified / this is
ultimate truth
14. Projections are twelve in number499 / dependent
reality is sixfold500 / the knowledge known to oneself /
includes not one distinction
15. The truth includes five dharmas / reality has three
modes / practitioners who distinguish these / don’t separate
them from suchness501
16. Dependent reality and appearances / imagined
reality and names / from the characteristics of projection /
dependent reality arises502
17. In the radiant light of wisdom / dependent and
imagined reality vanish / nor does perfected reality exist /
so how is anything distinguished 503

18. Because their natures are distinguished / the two
realities are established / where a myriad projections
appear / lies the realm of pure buddha knowledge
19. Imagined reality is like a painting / projecting
dependent reality / something other than projection / this is
the view of other schools504
20. What is projected by projection / they see
coming from causes / beyond the duality of projection505 /
this is where perfection occurs.”

LVI506
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please
tell us what characterizes the personal realization of buddha
knowledge and the one path so that507 by becoming well-versed
in what characterizes the personal realization of buddha
knowledge and the one path, I and the other bodhisattvas need
rely on nothing else to understand the teachings of buddhas.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder this
well, and I shall now instruct you.”
Mahamati answered, “May it be so, Bhagavan,” and gave his
full attention.
The Buddha said, “The teaching known and passed down by
the sages of the past is that projections are nonexistent and that
bodhisattvas should dwell alone in a quiet place and examine
their own awareness. By relying on nothing else and avoiding
views and projections, they steadily advance to the tathagata
stage. This is what characterizes the personal realization of
buddha knowledge.
“Mahamati, what characterizes the one path? When I speak
of the one path, I mean the one path to realization. And what
does the one path to realization mean? Projections, such as
projections of what grasps or what is grasped, do not arise in
suchness. This is what the one path to realization means.

Mahamati, the one path to realization is beyond the reach of
followers of other paths or shravakas or pratyeka-buddhas or
even Brahma508 but not tathagatas. This is why I speak of the
one path.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, why then do you
teach three paths and not teach one path?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Because neither shravakas
norpratyeka-buddhas enter nirvana by themselves, I do not
teach them the one path.509 Because shravakas and pratyeka-
buddhas attain liberation through training in detachment by the
tathagatas and not through their own power, I do not teach them
the one path. Also, Mahamati, I do not teach shravakas and
pratyeka-buddhas the one path because they have not yet put
an end to the habit-energy of karma or the obstruction of
passion.510 Because they are not aware that dharmas have no
self, and they are not free of karmic deaths,511 I teach them
three paths.512
“Mahamati, once they put an end to all the habit-energy that
gives rise to passion and realize that dharmas have no self, by
putting an end to the habit-energy that gives rise to passion, in
their affliction-free realms513 they will wake up to the
nonexistence of the samadhis to which they have been addicted.
And once they are awake, they will enter that highest of
transcendent, affliction-free realms where they obtain an
inconceivable, invincible dharma body complete with every
virtue.”
1. “A path for gods and Brahma / one for shravakas
and pratyeka- buddhas / another for tathagatas / these are

the paths I teach514
2. As long as the mind keeps turning / these paths
never end / when the mind finally ceases / there is no path
or one who walks it
3. The path that isn’t made / this is my one path / to
attract and guide all beings / I teach different paths
4. The three kinds of liberation515 / just like dharmas
have no self / when passion and knowledge are the
same516 / liberation is transcended
5. Like floating logs at sea / forever rolling with the
waves / thus are foolish shravakas / at the mercy of the
wind of characteristics
6. Though they keep passion from rising / the force of
its energy remains517 / addicted to the bliss of samadhi /
they dwell in affliction-free realms
7. But having no final goal / and having no place to
retreat to / in their samadhi-born bodies / they pass through
kalpas unaware
8. Like someone who is drunk / who wakes up when
the wine wears off / their awakening is the same / and their
buddha body too.”
Chapter Two. Mahamati now rises from the assembly and asks
the Buddha a series of questions. Comprising half the sutra, this
second chapter introduces us to the transformation of vision
whereby external or internal worlds are seen as nothing but
perceptions of our own mind. Although some commentators see
this chapter as dealing with a series of unrelated topics, each
section leads to the next in orderly progression, albeit a
progression that might make more sense to a practitioner than to
a student of philosophy. My translation of this and the remaining

chapters is based on the Chinese translation of Gunabhadra. For
those passages where I have preferred the translation of
Bodhiruchi or Shikshananda or the Sanskrit, I have mentioned
this in my notes.
1 Section I. This marks the beginning of what most scholars
think was the original form of this sutra. In order to avoid
repetition, I have omitted the initial paragraph of Gunabhadra’s
translation, which is substantially the same as the initial
paragraph of Bodhiruchi’s and Shikshananda’s translations and
the Sanskrit in Chapter One.
2 Requesting instruction involves expressing reverence with the
body, the mouth, and the mind. In this case, the Buddha helps
Mahamati make such a request.
3 I have preferred Bodhiruchi’s reading of the last two lines of
this verse and also of the following three verses.
4 In this first series of verses, Mahamati presents his
understanding of the Buddha’s teaching as well as his own
attainment. The “world” refers to the stage we clothe with reality
in order for our mind-play to have some credence. In light of the
Buddha’s wisdom, it does not exist. In light of the Buddha’s
compassion, it does not not exist.
5 Worldly “things” are produced by the magician of the mind to
decorate the stage on which the play of life and death is
performed. They include those that are intangible as well as
those that are tangible. The compound “mind and
consciousness,” or citta-vijnana, is used in this sutra to refer to
the eight forms of consciousness, with citta referring to the
alaya-vijnana, or repository consciousness, and vijnana
referring to the remaining seven, which include the will, or self-
consciousness, conceptual consciousness (which takes the will

as its organ and the following five as its object), and the different
forms of sensory consciousness.
6 Shikshananda and the Sanskrit follow this verse with two
verses that are not present in Gunabhadra or Bodhiruchi: “His
dharma body is a phantom / what is there to praise / knowing
nothing exists or arises / this is what we praise in buddhas. The
Buddha is not an object of sensation / to see no names is to see
the Buddha / in regard to Shakyamuni / how can praise or blame
be apt?”
7 Gunabhadra expands this verse into six lines. I’ve followed
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit, all of which render
it in four. Unlike Hinayana Buddhists, who see nirvana as the
final goal of practice, Mahayana Buddhists see it as a higher
form of delusion still involving the dualities of subject and object,
existence and nonexistence. These initial verses, although
spoken by Mahamati, refer to the view from a buddha’s
perspective, a view in which Mahamati is well-versed but which
he has yet to experience for himself.
8 An understanding of the doctrine of non-arising is associated
with the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path. The problem with
“arising” (or ceasing) is that it divides the past (or future) from
the present. It designates states of existence and nonexistence.
9 Section II. This section presents what is essentially a Buddhist
catechism, or list of topics that would have been studied at a
Buddhist vihara or academy during the period when this text
was compiled—albeit, a list representing all levels of knowledge,
from the most rudimentary to the most advanced. Some
commentators have tried to see an order in the list, but I’m of
the opinion it is merely an example of the way the repository
consciousness works: you never know what seed is going to

sprout next. After listening to Mahamati’s questions in verses 4–
50, the Buddha repeats them in verses 52–90. However, he
does not repeat them all and even adds a few of his own, as if in
anticipation of questions that might have been asked but
weren’t. In any case, these questions are merely fodder for the
Buddha’s teaching in Section III.
10 The number 108 was often used to refer to any large
number. Mahamati’s questions do not, in fact, total 108. Some
commentators wonder if this suggests that we don’t have them
all, that some were deleted over time. Even if we don’t have
them all, I think we have enough.
11 The personal experience of that realm which is free from
projection, free from subject and object, is this sutra’s
underlying teaching and will be referred to repeatedly. Thus, the
following series of questions, which range from the mundane to
the transcendent, are answered before they are asked. Self-
realization can begin anywhere, with any thought. And why not
this very thought? Curiously, in his commentary on the
Lankavatara, written after working on Shikshananda’s rough
draft, Fa-tsang notes that the 36,000-stanza version of the text
(of which we have no other information) included a chapter
devoted to explaining these 108 questions. But given the
Buddha’s answers to these questions, I would think any further
explanation would be irrelevant, if not misguided.
12 The lands in which buddhas appear and teach are meant
here, and “attributes” refer to the thirty-two physical attributes of
every buddha. Throughout this sutra, the term “other paths”
refers to non-Buddhist teachings.
13 The ten stages of the bodhisattva path are meant here. As for
freedom from projections, nir-abhasa has often been translated

as “imageless.” Monier-Williams’ definition is “non-erroneous
appearance.” But the usage of this term in the Lankavatara
concerns the absence of self-generated images or appearances.
Hence, I have usually translated this term as “freedom from
projections” or “projectionlessness. ” Mahamati anticipates the
qualifying condition of “self-realization." Only when one is free of
the projections of the mind can one apprehend what is real.
Gunabhadra adds an extra line here: “what does ‘freedom from
projection’ mean?” But no other edition follows suit.
14 Jina-putra—meaning “son of the victor”—is used
synonymously with bodhisattva.
15 The three paths normally include the two lesser paths of the
Hinayana, namely those of the shravakas and pratyeka-
buddhas, and the greater path of the Mahayana walked by
bodhisattvas. However, in Section LXVI of this sutra, the
Buddha says there is one path for gods and Bhrama, one for
shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas, and one for tathagatas. After
the last line, Gunabhadra alone adds: “Would you please
explain?”
16 What the Buddha criticizes in this sutra is the belief in the
reality of cause and effect, not the operation of cause and effect.
17 Meditations aimed at transcending the three realms and
entering the formless realm were practiced by Hinayana and
Mahayana monks as well as by followers of other paths. Usually
four formless meditations are listed: meditation on limitless
space, limitless consciousness, nothingness, and neither
perception nor non-perception. Complete cessation of
perception, to which the last two of these meditations refer, was
one of many descriptions of nirvana, which was the goal of
Hinayana practitioners.

18 The ten stages of the bodhisattva path are meant here.
19 The three realms of desire, form, and formlessness. If people
leave these behind, how do they become bodhisattvas?
20 The Buddha distinguishes eight forms of consciousness: the
basic five (visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile),
along with conceptual consciousness (mano-vijnana), self-
consciousness or will (manas), and repository or storehouse
consciousness (alaya-vijnana), which is sometimes referred to
in this sutra simply as “mind.”
21 The Sanskrit word gotra refers to membership in an ethnic,
familial, or religious group, and the word is usually translated
“family,” “lineage,” etc. Here, it also refers to the potential for
spiritual advancement, while agotra (no lineage) refers to the
absence of such potential among those who are spiritually
barren, such as icchantikas. For more on this, see sections XX
and XXII.
22 Views of life and death in terms of something that lasts
forever or the end of all that exists were the two extremes that
Buddhism’s Middle Way sought to avoid.
23 In the centuries following the Buddha’s Nirvana, his followers
established dozens of sects. Here, though, the Sanskrit specifies
the Naiyayika, who didn’t appear as a sect until the second
century and who otherwise refer to non-Buddhist proponents of
logic.
24 A kshana is the shortest imaginable period of time. Not only
can the question about a womb be read as a conundrum (which
comes first: the baby or the womb?), it can also be read as
referring to the tathagata-garbha (womb of buddhas) or the
alaya-vijnana (repository consciousness).
25 The world is said to shake upon the birth of a buddha.

Hence, Mahamati wonders why it no longer shakes. Is the
Buddha not still a buddha?
26 As noted earlier, gandharvas are celestial musicians who live
in the sky. Hence, a “city of gandharvas” was a common
metaphor for an illusion, in this case, one based on the shape of
clouds.
27 The Sanskrit is bodhi-angani. There are seven: perception
of the true, perception of the false, zeal, joy, transcendence,
remembrance, and renunciation.
28 The Sanskrit is bodhi-paksha. There are thirty-seven, seven
of which are the above-mentioned “aids.”
29 A flower we see in the sky isn’t real. More likely it’s the
result of a cataract. Thus, the “flower” neither comes into
existence as a flower nor does it cease to exist as the image of a
flower.
30 For this line, Gunabhadra has “Who gets free from
projection,” but no other version agrees. Gunabhadra, however,
does have this line in the next verse.
31 The world beyond projection is suchness, the sky as
opposed to a flower in the sky. Among the examples of tathata,
or suchness, are the undifferentiated mind, buddha-nature, the
dharma body, the tathagata-garbha, reality itself, the dharma
realm, and dharma nature. As for divisions of the mind, the
Lankavatara mentions eight kinds of consciousness. The six
paramitas, or means to the other shore, include charity, morality,
forbearance, zeal, meditation, and wisdom, to which skillful
means, vows, strength, and knowledge were later added to
make ten.
32 Bodhiruchi omits this line, while Shikshananda has “how
does one attain freedom from projection?” Suzuki renders the

Sanskrit as “what is the state of imagelessness?”
33 Most accounts of the bodhisattva path list ten stages. The
projectionless realm, which is free from subject and object, is
associated with the eighth stage. Due to the obstruction of
passion, ordinary people see a self in beings. And due to the
obstruction of knowledge, Hinayana practitioners see a self in
dharmas.
34 According to the Buddha’s contemporaries, it was Brahma
who created language and also the variations among beings.
35 Cakravartins (wheel–turning–kings) are those whose
accumulated merit results in a birth in which they have the option
of becoming a buddha or ruling the world.
36 In the first line, instead of “liberation,” Sanskrit texts have
vidya-sthana: “fields of knowledge,” but no Chinese text
agrees.
37 The Sanskrit has jataka, referring to the literary genre in
which the previous lives of Shakyamuni were recorded. Some
texts recount as many as 500 previous lives.
38 The term mara, or demon, is used for those who obstruct
other beings from understanding the Dharma or who cause
chaos, illness, and death in the world. During the Buddha’s time,
there were said to be ninety-six heterodox paths. The reference
can also be taken in the pejorative sense as equivalent to
“heretics.”
39 According to the Yogacara conception, there are three
modes of sva-bhava, or reality: imagined, dependent, and
perfected.
40 The Sanskrit omits the first two lines, although they are
present in all three Chinese translations. Since Mahamati has
already asked about how many kinds of consciousness in verse

20, here he is probably referring to the varieties of mental
dharmas that formed the basis of abhidharma.
41 The Sanskrit is prajnapti-matra. This Yogacara concept
means that whatever we might say exists only exists as a verbal
convention or designation. What is real cannot be designated or
indicated because it includes the finger and the one doing the
pointing.
42 The Sanskrit combines the last two lines into one and for the
fourth line has: “Tell me, Lord, about the three realms.”
43 This line is missing in Gunabhadra (and replaced by a
repetition of the fourth line) but present in all other editions. The
Sanskrit is citta-sarathi (mind-charioteer), where sarathi also
means “guide.”
44 Apparently in the sense of “ritually observe.” The Sanskrit is
grahana. In India the year was divided into six two-month
seasons.
45 Icchantikas are those so immersed in pleasure, they are
incapable of understanding the Dharma. Thus, they are said to
lack the ability to become buddhas.
46 Androgynes are neither male nor female, though they can
appear as either.
47 For the third and fourth lines, Suzuki, following the Sanskrit,
has: “How many exercises are there / and how are men kept
abiding in them?”
48 Buddhists list five realms of rebirth: gods, humans, animals,
sinners or demons in hell, and hungry ghosts. To these, a sixth is
sometime added, namely, that of asuras, ex-gods who make war
on other gods.
49 For the last two lines, the Sanskrit has: “How does one
become a lord of wealth, tell me, you who art like the sky?”

50 The Buddha was born into the Shakya clan, and his name,
Shakyamuni, meant “Sage of the Shakyas.” His entire clan was
exterminated during a war while he was still alive. King Ikshvaku
was the earliest known ruler of India. His name means “sugar
cane,” and one story has him arising from the stalk of such a
plant as a baby. Some Buddhists and Jains trace the founders of
their lineages back to Ikshvaku. The ascetic referred to was
apparently one of the teachers Shakyamuni met prior to
becoming a buddha. Perhaps it was the one who taught that
liberation required depriving the body of sustenance. Both
Gunabhadra and Bodhiruchi render this verse in six lines. The
Sanskrit for the last two lines is obscure. In line three, if
dirghapatah is a mistake for dirghatapas, then it might be
rendered, “Who was the ascetic Dirghatapas / and how did he
prevail?” See also verse 84 in this section.
51 Hinayana Buddhists believed there was only one buddha for
each epoch and world, although they acknowledged that each
buddha could manifest apparitions in other worlds. Mahayana
Buddhists hold that there are countless buddhas, both in time
and space.
52 This sutra devotes its final chapter to encouraging
practitioners to refrain from eating meat. Eating meat was not
proscribed by the precepts adhered to by monks and nuns, if
only because they begged for their food and had to eat whatever
they were given. However, eating the meat of elephants, horses,
lions, and humans was proscribed, apparently as a sumptuary
restriction. In any case, the precepts do proscribe the killing of
living creatures or being responsible for their deaths.
53 Mount Sumeru is at the center of each world, and its height is
beyond any known measure. Gunabhadra compresses this verse

and also the next into three lines. I’ve followed Shikshananda in
my order of lines for this verse and also for the next two.
54 The swastika, or shrivatsa, was an ancient cruciform symbol
similar in meaning to the yin-yang symbol of China as
representing the cycle of change among the different forces of
creation.
55 Indra, or Shakra, is the creator of the world. His palace
includes a net of jewels, each of which reflects all the other
jewels.
56 At the end of this, Gunabhadra adds, “Like this and
countless other shapes.”
57 Gunabhadra alone presents four buddhas here. The
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and Sanskrit texts have the first two
(nirmanika-buddha and buddha-vipakaja) and a third that
reads as a combination of Gunabhadra’s third and fourth
(tathata-jnana-buddha—a buddha who knows suchness).
When Buddhists first developed their theories of a buddha’s
different bodies, some considered a four-body version before
finally settling on three bodies. Perhaps the difference in texts
here reflects that development. But compare this with Section
XIV, where Gunabhadra also has three.
58 The three realms include the realm of desire (in which there
are either five or six kinds of existence), the realm of form (in
which there are four heavens), and the formless realm (in which
there are also four heavens or levels). It was in the highest
heaven of the three realms that the Buddha attained
Enlightenment and also that he later entered Nirvana.
59 Sugata is another epithet for a buddha. It means “well-gone.”
60 Hinayana and Mahayana texts give different accounts of the
length of time the Dharma will be taught and understood. But

both agree that such understanding will eventually come to an
end.
61 The Sanskrit is siddhanta, for which see Section LXIII. This
term was used in logic to denote a conclusion based on
reasoning and example. But here and elsewhere in the
Lankavatara, it refers to a “spiritual conclusion” that transcends
logic. “Code of ethics” is a translation for vinaya.
62 Again, the text has jina-putra (sons of victors) for
bodhisattvas.
63 The transformation of one’s awareness from the imagined,
fabricated world of projections to a perfected view devoid of
projections is one of the basic teachings of the Yogacara.
However, in this sutra such a view is considered provisional. The
Sanskrit is nirabhasa-shata.
64 The five higher powers include distant vision and hearing,
bodily transport, telepathy, and knowledge of past lives. The
transcendent powers refer to those essential to progress on the
bodhisattva path, such as awareness of the illusory nature of the
self. Before the Mahayana developed a ten-stage path, early
Buddhists saw their practice as involving seven stages, to which
the bodhisattva path added three more stages. Freedom from
projections or false appearances characterizes the eighth, which
is essentially the first stage of buddhahood.
65 The different kinds of sangha, or spiritual community, include
both lay and monastic, which can be further characterized by the
dominant form of practice: Zen, Pure Land, Tantric, Vipassana.
The Buddha was called the Great Physician because his
sermons on spiritual health were often couched in the language
of physical health. The last line only appears in Gunabhadra.
66 Krakucchanda and Kanakamuni were the names of the first

two buddhas of the present kalpa. Kashyapa was the third, and
Shakyamuni (Mahamuni) was the fourth. The Buddha taught that
all buddhas are one buddha.
67 Gunabhadra expands the last two lines into four but without
adding anything. I’ve followed Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and
the Sanskrit.
68 The reference to gender-specific trees is to species that
produce fruits resembling men or women. Karitaki and amali
refer here to the fruits of trees, the first of which has a heavenly
taste, the second of which never ripens. Kailash is a sacred
peak in the Himalayas and remains a center of pilgrimage. The
Iron Ring Mountains surround the seas that surround the world.
At the center of the world is Mount Sumeru at the top of which
is Diamond Summit.
69 Rishis are seers or shamans and often associated with
mountains. Gandharvas are beings that live in the sky.
Gunabhadra omits the last line, and Shikshananda expands this
verse into six lines. I’ve followed Bodhiruchi and the Sanskrit.
Mahamati is also referring to their appearance and
disappearance in Chapter One.
70 Depending on which text one uses, Mahamati asks
somewhere between 104 and 112 questions. In repeating them,
however, the Buddha does not list them all and even adds new
items to the list.
71 In the context of this verse, noting the absence of self-
existence (sva-bhava) is intended to deny that there is anything
that exists or continues to exist in nirvana, in emptiness, from one
moment to the next, or from one life to the next.
72 Gunabhadra spreads this over six lines. I’ve followed
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit.

73 Asuras are gods who have been expelled from the heavens
atop Mount Sumeru and who now make war on the other gods.
74 Buddhist texts list eight liberations, countless masteries, and
five, or sometimes six, higher powers.
75 The Sanskrit is nirodha, or extinction of suffering, which is
the third of the Buddha’s Four Noble Truths; the ability to travel
as fast as thought is one of the five higher powers; there are
seven aids and thirty-seven elements of the path to
enlightenment; among meditations are those of boundless light
and boundless purity; and the five skandhas represent the
constituents of what seems to be the individual.
76 In this case, “the mind” refers to the eighth consciousness,
“the will” to the seventh, and “conceptual consciousness” to the
sixth. The five dharmas include name, appearance, projection,
correct knowledge, and suchness. “No self” refers to no self in
persons and no self in dharmas or things.
77 Icchantikas are those whose karmic roots are so
impoverished they lack the ability to understand the Dharma.
The external world is seen as composed of the material elements
of earth, water, fire, and wind. The question of whether there
was one buddha or many was a subject of debate among early
Buddhists.
78 Proofs (siddhanta) are formulated on the basis of reason
and demonstrated through the use of illustration. Elsewhere in
this sutra, siddhanta is used to refer to “spiritual proofs,” and in
such cases I have translated the word as “attainments.”
Gunabhadra compresses the last two lines into one.
79 Mahamati asked earlier, “How do we pass through the
stages?” But the Buddha’s teaching in this sutra is that stages are
provisional and meant to be transcended, if not abandoned.

80 This refers to the overturning or transformation (paravrtti) of
one’s foundation, which occurs as a result of the freedom from
projections (nirabhasa) that accompanies or marks the eighth
stage of the bodhisattva path.
81 This last line is missing in Gunabhadra and Shikshananda.
82 The last line is missing in Gunabhadra and Shikshananda.
83 The last two lines are missing in Bodhiruchi. A bow-length
(dhanu) was an ancient Indian unit of linear measurement equal
to about six feet.
84 Units of length, capacity, and weight are used here to
demonstrate that everything is made of parts and thus does not
exist on its own. A pada is a foot in length, and a hasta, or
forearm, is one and a half feet. A krosha is about two miles, and
four kroshas make a yojana, or a day’s march for an army,
variously measured at around eight miles. As for the smaller
measurements, there are seven dust motes in a mote of airborne
dust, seven motes of airborne dust in a rabbit hair, seven rabbit
hairs in a sheep hair, seven sheep hairs in a cow hair, seven cow
hairs in a gnat, seven gnats in a louse egg, seven lice eggs in a
mustard seed, seven mustard seeds in a barley grain, and seven
barley grains in a fingertip. Thus, there are nearly two billion dust
motes in a fingertip.
85 The Sanskrit terms here are prastha (quart) and drona
(bushel). Ten bushels is a kharya, a hundred thousand bushels is
a laksha, a million bushels is a koti, and a billion is a bimbara
or vimvara. Gunabhadra spreads this verse over six lines.
86 Except for dust motes and mustard seeds, the Sanskrit terms
here were also used as units of exchange in the marketplace.
Hence, my translations are merely indicative of measurements
smaller than a gram. Again, Gunabhadra renders this in six lines.

87 Again, the units of the marketplace are meant here, and my
use of grams (grains would have been more appropriate, but this
would have been confusing following “grass grains”), ounces,
and pounds is simply meant to indicate approximate
relationships with the idea being that since parts make up a
whole, they negate the self-existence of the parts and the whole.
Gunabhadra’s version extends over six lines. I’ve followed
Bodhiruchi here.
88 In the third line, I’ve followed Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda,
who specify “dust motes,” while Gunabhadra has simply
“number.” All versions render this in six lines. In this and the
following verse, the Buddha seems to chastise Mahamati for the
limitations of his questions. But then in verse 78 he resumes
recounting Mahamati’s questions.
89 Gunabhadra spreads this over five lines.
90 The “diamond-hard mountain” refers to Diamond Summit
atop Mount Sumeru. For the second line, which is missing in
Gunabhadra, I’ve used Bodhiruchi’s version. The Sanskrit
mrga-trshna (deer-thirst) is a standard metaphor for the illusory
nature of projections.
91 This entire verse is missing in Gunabhadra. I’ve followed
Bodhiruchi.
92 The first two lines are missing in Gunabhadra, which I’ve
replaced with those of Bodhiruchi. In Mahamati’s earlier
question, the last two lines referred to the rishis and gandharvas
on the peaks manifested by the Buddha.
93 This is another verse that Gunabhadra has expanded into six
lines.
94 The first line is handled differently by every text. I’ve
followed Gunabhadra.

95 Gunabhadra expands the last two lines into four but without
adding anything of substance.
96 I’ve followed Gunabhadra for the third line. Bodhiruchi has:
“why do you ask me?” Shikshananda has: “and what about the
other aids (of the path).” Meanwhile Sanskrit texts add “the
logicians of other paths” to the third line and follow this with “O,
Son of Victors.”
97 This verse is in six lines in Gunabhadra and the Sanskrit, five
in Shikshananda, and four in Bodhiruchi. Again, designation
(prajnapti) refers to the arbitrary fabrication of something as
existing or not existing.
98 The name of an ascetic sage. He also appears in verse 35.
99 Gunabhadra renders this in five lines, which I’ve expanded
into six for purposes of euphony. Shikshananda and the Sanskrit
also have it in six lines, but do so by adding part of the next
verse.
100 This is the highest heaven in the realm of form. Suzuki adds
the first two lines of this verse to the end of the previous verse.
Gunabhadra compresses the first two lines into one line. In this
case, I’ve followed Shikshananda.
101 Gunabhadra has four buddhas, instead of three, expanding
“buddhas of true knowledge” into “buddhas of suchness” and
“buddhas of impartial knowledge.” In the last couplet, extant
Sanskrit texts have “bodhisattva” while all three Chinese
translations have “sangha.”
102 Gunabhadra compresses this into three lines. I’ve followed
Shikshananda. The first seven stages of the bodhisattva path are
meant here, during which one has not yet realized the
nonexistence of a self among dharmas.
103 Gunabhadra renders this in five lines, which I’ve put into

four, as has Shikshananda.
104 Neither Mahamati’s questions nor the Buddha’s repetition
of them add up to 108, nor do those that follow in the next
section.
105 Section III. In other sutras, the Buddha responds to such
questions with the doctrine of relativity: birth only exists if death
exists. Since neither exists by itself, neither is ultimately real.
Here, he assumes this is already understood and turns to the
doctrine of negation instead: to talk about anything is to talk
about nothing. This section can also be viewed as following from
the Buddha’s explanation of dharmas and non-dharmas to
Ravana at the end of Chapter One. Essentially, all dharmas are
non-dharmas. That is, they are nothing more than arbitrary
designations behind which nothing is real. In the Diamond Sutra
(Chapters 8 and 17), the Buddha says, “As for dharmas,
Subhuti, only as non-dharmas can we speak of dharmas.” This
is the meaning of the Buddha’s statement in #90 above that he
will be answering Mahamati’s questions with “truths that
transcend words.” Note, too, that in Section XI, we are told
that these 108 questions are not to be answered on the basis of
“feebleminded knowledge” but buddha knowledge.
106 Because he uses the same Chinese characters for “modes
of reality” and “self existence,” Gunabhadra uses li-tzu-hsing
(transcend modes of reality) in place of fei-tzu-hsing (no modes
of reality) to differentiate this statement from his statement later
in which he has fei-tzu-hsing (no self-existence). I’ve followed
Shikshananda in this case.
107 Shikshananda reads citta (mind) instead of anta (extreme)
here. Apparently, the Sanskrit text was altered sometime after
Gunabhadra’s translation appeared, with anta being mistaken as

antah (feeling/mind), and this subsequently replaced by citta.
Bodhiruchi has two separate statements for both “mind” and
“extreme.”
108 When expedience and skill are differentiated, as they are
here, expedience is viewed as insight into a situation and skill as
the application of that insight.
109 Normally, these refer to the paths of the shravaka, the
pratyeka-buddha, and the bodhisattva. However, in Section
LXVI, the Buddha says among the three paths, one path is for
gods and Brahma, one is for shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas,
and one is for tathagatas.
110 Apparently there is a copyist error in Gunabhadra’s text. He
has suo-yu (projection) instead of wu-suo-yu (no projection).
The Sanskrit is nirabhasa, which Gunabhadra normally renders
either wu-suo-shou or wu-suo-yu. Since Gunabhadra has suo-
yu later in this series, he must have originally had wu-suo-yu
here, which is supported by Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda.
111 According to the teachings of the Yogacara, there have
been three turnings of the wheel of the Dharma, each directed to
audiences with different levels of understanding: the first was the
Buddha’s teaching of the Four Noble Truths and the
Abhidharma that followed, the second was the Madhyamaka
teachings of Nagarjuna and others, and the third was the
Yogacara teachings of this and other mind-only texts.
112 Bodhiruchi has “a statement about existence and
nonexistence,” while Shikshananda breaks “existence” and
“nonexistence” into two statements.
113 This refers to the third item in the tetralemma popular with
logicians: x, y, both x and y, neither x nor y.
114 Gunabhadra combines this and the previous statement into

one statement: “the personal realization of buddha knowledge
and delight in what is present is about no delight in what is
present.” However, the omission in the second part of his
statement suggests his text was corrupt or his translation was
miscopied. I’ve rendered this as two statements, as have
Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda. The Sanskrit for the second
statement is drishta-dharma-sukha, which appears again near
the end of the sutra.
115 The Sanskrit is bhuta, referring to the four material
elements.
116 Gunabhadra divides the Sanskrit (samkhya-ganita) into
two statements, one concerning numbers, and the other
enumeration, but using the same Chinese characters for both.
I’ve restricted my rendering to one statement, as have
Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda.
117 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda divide this (shilpa-kala-
vidya) into two statements about “crafts” and “sciences.”
118 The Sanskrit is prajnapti, which refers to the arbitrary
fabrication or identification of individual entities. Thus, the term
prajnapti–matra (designation–only) was a hallmark of
Yogacara texts.
119 Shikshananda alone has “wheels of fire.”
120 The Sanskrit is nirodha-vyutthana (cessation-arising).
Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda preface this statement with: “a
statement about cessation is about no cessation.” Instead of
“cessation and arising,” this refers to emerging from a state of
meditation such as the Samadhi of Cessation.
121 This refers to aids to enlightenment, or bodhi-anga.
122 The assurances meant here are those given to bodhisattvas
concerning their future buddhahood.

123 This statement is only present in Gunabhadra.
Unconditioned or uncreated things (asamskrita-dharma)
include space and two types of nirvana.
124 After this, Bodhiruchi adds, “a statement about nuns is
about no nuns.”
125 The Sanskrit is adhishthana, which means “resting place”
or “refuge” but also “what supports” practice.
126 Gunabhadra has 104 answers, as do I. However, he
combines two that everyone else separates (personal realization
of buddha knowledge and delight in what is present), and he
adds two not found in any other text or translation (numbers and
moral codes). Although Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda differ in
their inclusion or exclusion of certain answers, only Bodhiruchi’s
total comes to 108.
127 The last sentence is present in Gunabhadra and Bodhiruchi
but not in Shikshananda or current Sanskrit texts. The reason
bodhisattvas should study this is that seeing whatever they think
of as real as not real will free them from the fabrication or
projection of reality and prepare them for the personal
realization of what buddhas know.
128 Section IV. Mahamati continues by asking the same kind of
question he asked before: “How many kinds of this or that are
there?” He now asks about consciousness because the reality of
its contents has just been denied. However, the Buddha did not
deny consciousness it self. To do so would have been to side
with those nihilists who held that nothing remained after death.
Thus, while Mahamati asks about the apparent rising and
ceasing of consciousness, implicit in his question is a concern
with its ceasing. The Buddha answers that while consciousness
rises and ceases, it possesses an intrinsic quality that remains

unaffected by those forms of consciousness tied to the contents
he has just now denied. Such forms are themselves delusions
that can only be said to exist as long as the alaya-vijnana, or
repository consciousness, is not transformed into the tathagata-
garba, or womb of buddhas.
129 The Sanskrit for “continuity” is prabandha. For
“characteristic,” it is lakshana . Both of these terms also occur
in early Indian music, with prabandha denoting the underlying
form or connectedness of music and lakshana denoting its
surface melody. Again, the ocean and its waves come to mind.
130 Yin-shun says only with the cessation of consciousness as a
continuity and as a characteristic can our true nature appear.
131 The unfolding/transforming (paravrtti) aspect is produced
by causes, the karmic (karma) aspect produces effects, while
the intrinsic (jati) aspect remains free from causes and effects.
The Sanskrit for “aspect” here is also lakshana.
132 Gunabhadra alone includes “true consciousness.” Since the
text segues into “true consciousness” in the next paragraph, it
would only make sense if it had already been mentioned. Hence,
I have followed Gunabhadra. Basically, this threefold division is
a simplification of the eightfold division of consciousness, with
perceiving consciousness (or the unfolding aspect of
consciousness) including the five sensory forms of
consciousness; object-projecting consciousness (or the karmic
aspect of consciousness) including the sixth and seventh forms of
consciousness; and true consciousness (or the intrinsic aspect of
consciousness) including the eighth form of consciousness, or at
least the eighth form transformed into the tathagata-garbha.
133 Again, the point seems to be that perceiving consciousness
is the recipient of karma, and object-projecting consciousness

creates it.
134 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit texts have
alaya-vijnana, or repository consciousness.
135 The cessation of consciousness here refers not to the
cessation of repository consciousness, but only to the karma-
creating and ever-unfolding aspects of the five forms of sensory
consciousness along with the sixth form, conceptual
consciousness.
136 This phrase is only present in Gunabhadra.
137 What in chapters Three and Four are referred to as “the
threefold combination.”
138 The Buddha presents two nihilistic views held by other
paths regarding the cessation of the continuity of consciousness:
the first holds that it is dependent on sensory consciousness
alone, and the second holds that it is not dependent on sensory
consciousness but on some external entity. The Buddha’s view,
as presented above, is that the intrinsic state of consciousness
does not cease, only those states tied to the sowing and
sprouting of the seeds of projection that obscure it cease.
139 Section V. Most commentators read this as a continuation
of the last statement of the previous section—as a list of the
“something else” that followers of other paths considered
responsible for the continuity of consciousness. Thus,
Gunabhadra’s and Shikshananda’s translations could be read as
beginning “Furthermore, Mahamati, they have” instead of “there
are.” Bodhiruchi’s translation is not so ambiguous: “Moreover,
Mahamati, followers of others paths have seven kinds of self-
existence.” However, some commentators disagree with
Bodhiruchi’s reading and see these as seven examples of the
Buddha’s use of skillful means and conventional truth, beginning

with the origination (samu-daya ) of suffering and concluding
with the completion (nishpatti) of the Eightfold Noble Path.
Given the Buddha’s comment in the next section concerning his
establishing of both “mundane” and “metaphysical” truths in
addition to “transcendent truths,” I have decided in favor of
retaining the ambiguity.
140 The Sanskrit is bhava-svabhava and refers to something
whose existence is not predicated or dependent on anything else
in time, in space, or in mind. The term could also be translated
as “reality.” However, I have tried to reserve the use of that
word for such terms as tri-svabhava (the three modes of
reality), bhutakoti (ultimate reality), etc.
141 Section VI. Contrasting this with the previous section,
Bodhiruchi begins, “I have seven kinds of higher truth.”
Commentators generally agree with his interpretation, if not with
his inclusion of wo (I), that these seven refer to seven successive
levels of understanding used in dealing with erroneous views
arising from the preceding seven forms of self-existence.
142 The Sanskrit for “higher truth” is parama-artha.
143 However one views the seven kinds of self-existence of
Section V, it is clear that their proper use is dependent on
buddha knowledge. Only the eye of wisdom exercised by a
buddha can see without seeing and thus remain unattached to
what is seen.
144 The three realms of existence include those of desire, form,
and formlessness.
145 The concluding statement suggests that the foregoing has
been an introduction and, as elsewhere, the Buddha is not so
concerned with philosophical argument as he is with putting an
end to suffering, which arises from projection and which ceases

upon understanding the true nature of one’s own perceptions.
146 Section VII. This section critiques the views regarding
causation held by the Sarvastivadins and Vaishesikas, among
others, who held that the effect exists in the cause or that it does
not exist in the cause. T’ai-hsu and Yin-shun note how ridiculous
such views regarding the existence or nonexistence of cause and
effect can be. If the result does not exist in the cause, this would
be like eating but never producing shit. But if the effect exists in
the cause, this would be tantamount to shit being present in
food. This section mercifully ends with the transcendence of all
views of causation.
147 The Buddha is denying the validity of impermanence. Te-
ch‘ing says, “The broken jug is a metaphor for no effect, the
burnt seed for no cause.” Yin-shun says, “If a thought that has
arisen ceases, where does the next thought come from? Once
the previous thought ceases, the subsequent thought has no
cause of origination. Vasubandhu is quoted as saying: ‘Once a
rooster dies, how is it going to crow?’”
148 Te-ch’ing says, “Tortoises do not have any hair because
there is no such cause, and sand is not the source of cooking oil
because there is no such effect.” The threefold conjunction
normally refers to the combination of a sense organ, a sense
object, and the form of sensory consciousness that arises upon
their conjunction.
149 This term is often used in Sanskrit as the opposite pair to
nirvana. Although usually understood to mean “birth and death,”
it means “wandering,” as in wandering through birth and death.
150 The Sanskrit is maya-upama-samadhi. This is a samadhi
in which one acquires an illusory body, hence the name.
151 Te-ch’ing notes that changing one’s understanding is

immediate, changing one’s behavior takes longer.
152 In this section, the Buddha rejects focusing on the study of
dharmas, or at least dharmas viewed as subject to causation.
This is because anything that might be subject to causation, and
that thus exists in time, does not, in fact, exist except as an
illusory concept.
153 Section VIII. This summarizes and concludes the foregoing
sections.
154 Section IX. The Buddha briefly explains how consciousness
works and then points out that it can only be transcended by
realizing that consciousness itself is a self-fabricated fiction. Such
a teaching, however, is not something everyone is prepared to
hear. Hence, buddhas vary their teachings to suit the audience.
155 Gunabhadra alone words this first paragraph as a statement
of what the Buddha has taught, rather than as a request to cover
such topics. Given the Buddha’s response, I’ve decided to
follow Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit in this case.
156 As elsewhere in this sutra, “mind” (citta) means “to gather”
and refers to the eighth consciousness where karmic seeds
generated by the other seven are stored and manifested; “will”
(manas) means “to reason, reflect, consider” and refers to our
seventh consciousness; and “conceptual consciousness” (mano-
vijnana) means “consciousness of the mind” and refers to the
sixth consciousness, which conceptualizes the five forms of
sensory consciousness.
157 T’ai-hsu says, “The dharma body has no attributes but also
does not have no attributes. Because it has no attributes, it is the
nature of suchness. Because it does not have no attributes, it is
the waves of our repository consciousness.”
158 This differs from the usual list, which include the power of

sensation, the domain of sensation, the consciousness that arises
from their conjunction, and the desire for sensation.
159 These two metaphors are distinguished with images in the
mirror representing a static view of consciousness and the ocean
and waves representing a dynamic view. In the metaphor of the
ocean and waves, the water represents repository
consciousness, the movement of water represents the will (or
self-consciousness), the waves represent conceptual
consciousness, and the wind is that of externality.
160 This is a difficult paragraph in any language, and all three
Chinese translations differ quite a bit, as does the Sanskrit. I’ve
followed Gunabhadra, I think.
161 These are all examples of the color white.
162 As elsewhere, the word “mind” is often used for the eighth,
or alaya, consciousness.
163 Gunabhadra spreads this over six lines, repeating the last
two lines of the previous verse, which I’ve omitted, as have
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit.
164 Gunabhadra’s version of this verse is problematic, as it
focuses only on conceptual consciousness (yi-shih). Hence, I’ve
followed Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda in this case.
165 This line also appears in the first verse of Section LXVI.
166 The Sanskrit specifies mano-vijnana (conceptual
consciousness), but none of the Chinese translations do.
167 I’ve based my translation of the third line on Shikshananda.
Gunabahdra has “what is grasped and what isn’t grasped.”
168 The word yeh (karma) is only present in Gunabhadra.
Given the Buddha’s response, Gunabhadra’s text is clearly
preferable here.
169 This division of a quatrain between two speakers is unusual,

but it occurs here in the translations of both Gunabhadra and
Shikshananda.
170 Though both appear as one, we focus on the wave, not the
ocean, the image, not the mirror, the dream, not the dreamer, the
object, not the mind.
171 The five forms of sensory-based consciousness are meant
here. Unlike most four-line verses in this sutra, this one stops in
the middle and then begins another metaphor that is developed
in the next verse.
172 The Sanskrit vyabhicarin means “to deviate” or “to have
secondary meanings.” But it also means “to be unfaithful,” which
is the only meaning that follows from the simile of artistic
representations that precedes it. Bodhiruchi translates this line:
“teachings are separate from the truth,” while Shikshananda
renders it: “teachings change and diverge.”
173 For the first line, Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda have: “The
truth I have attained.”
174 Section X. For the Buddha, the path to understanding is not
through speculation or philosophical discourse but through
personal realization, which requires avoiding distractions and
cultivating whatever brings one closer to one’s own mind.
175 Section XI. The cultivation of buddha knowledge
advocated by the Buddha in the previous sections is viewed
here as having three aspects: realizing that dharmas are empty,
realizing that dharmas are not empty, realizing that dharmas are
neither empty nor not empty. The division of this section is rather
odd in that it ends by having Mahamati pose a question that isn’t
answered until the following section. This division must be
peculiar to the Japanese commentary on which Suzuki based his
divisions, as I cannot find a Chinese commentary that follows

suit.
176 The Sanskrit is nirabhasa, where nir is a negative prefix,
and where abhasa means “erroneous appearance” but also
refers to a thing’s “range” or “scope.” Previous translators have
preferred “imageless,” which is fine as long as one understands
that the images in question are self-generated or projected.
Freedom from projections or erroneous appearances is usually
associated with the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path.
177 Knowledge appears to the mind in forms that can become
an obstruction to personal realization. Thus, knowledge of the
first seven stages is sometimes called feebleminded or “lameass”
knowledge because it concerns one’s own liberation—the
attainment of nirvana and not enlightenment.
178 The body that accompanies this samadhi is one of the three
projection bodies. For more on this, see Section LVII.
179 I have followed Edgerton’s reading of abhinivrtta here in
maya-vishaya- abhinivrtta (to depart illusory realms).
Gunabhadra has “give rise to illusory realms.” Shikshananda has
“enter illusory realms.” And Bodhiruchi has “which is composed
of illusory realms.”
180 Tushita Heaven is where bodhisattvas are reborn prior to
their final rebirth, the one during which they attain buddhahood.
Akanishtha Heaven is the highest heaven in the realm of form
and where buddhahood is attained.
181 We can see from Mahamati’s “question” that according to
his view, buddha knowledge is the end of the path to
buddhahood. Thus, he reviews the attainments of its final stages
—namely, the eighth through the tenth stages. Only Gunabhadra
includes the modifier “ever-present” (ch’ang-chu) before
“body” (shen). This entire paragraph should be understood as

belonging to the beginning of the next section.
182 Section XII. Among the three aspects of buddha
knowledge mentioned in the previous section, the first was
freedom from projections, which is often misinterpreted to mean
nonexistence. Here, the Buddha steers his audience past the
shoals of arguments involving views concerning either existence
or nonexistence, as both are nothing but the perceptions of one’s
own mind. The validity of any ontological argument is thus
denied, as is the relevance of such arguments.
183 What causes rabbit horns is the misperception of rabbit
ears as rabbit horns.
184 The arguments here are simplified to the point where they
don’t quite tell us enough. The first position is based on the idea
that if the existence of an entity ends when the causes that
support its existence end, then it doesn’t exist in the first place.
Hence, the reason rabbit horns don’t exist isn’t because they are
a mistake of perception, but because their necessary cause,
namely, the mistake of perception, doesn’t exist—or it
shouldn’t, once one has a better view. And since the causes on
which anything is based eventually cease to exist, nothing exists.
The logic of the second is based on the idea that as long as
something is composed of some kind of underlying entity, it must
also exist. Thus ox horns are real, while rabbit horns are not.
For the Buddha, both positions are beside the point. The only
reason anything can be said to exist or not is merely a matter of
projections, which are themselves nothing but perceptions of the
mind.
185 Here, “it” refers to “discrimination.”
186 Section XIII. As elsewhere in this sutra, not all of these
verses repeat what is said in the prose that precedes them. In

this case, they point beyond the alternatives of existence and
nonexistence to what cannot be described, only experienced. In
that regard, they summarize much of the foregoing and not just
the preceding section.
187 I’ve followed Bodhiruchi for this line. Gunabhadra has:
“There is no form or mind,” which is not the teaching here.
Shikshananda agrees with Bodhiruchi: “What the mind sees
does not exist.” The Sanskrit has drshyam na vidyate cittam /
cittam dyrshyat pravartate which translates to: “Mind does
not exist as what is visible / but the mind emerges from what is
visible.” Form is used here to represent all the skandhas, of
which it is the first of five.
188 Section XIV. Like all bodhisattvas, Mahamati has vowed to
liberate all beings, hence he asks whether such liberation, or
“purification” of the mind, occurs by degrees (krama-vrittya)
or all at once (yugapat). The Buddha presents a series of eight
metaphors, four of which demonstrate how purification takes
place by degrees and four of which demonstrate how it takes
place all at once. The first four are said to relate to the early
stages of the bodhisattva path and the second four to the later
stages. What is noteworthy is that in the light of the two kinds of
no-self, beings do not purify their own minds, rather their minds
are purified by buddhas.
189 The Sanskrit is vishuddhi, meaning “clear,” “pure,” “free
from error.”
190 The amalalamla, or Phyllanthus emblica.
191 These four similes liken the purification of the mind by
degrees to a fruit that develops naturally, a vessel produced by a
creator, a living thing produced by a nonliving thing, and a skill
that requires time and effort.

192 Images in a mirror are formless until someone distinguishes
them as to color and shape. The mirror itself reflects without
distinguishing among forms.
193 The terminology used here in reference to a buddha’s three
bodies is unique to the Lankavatara but commensurate with the
standard trio of Mahayana Buddhism: dharma-kaya,
sambhoga-kaya, and nirmana-kaya, or the bodies of truth,
realization, and appearance. In this case, the nishyanda buddha
is associated with “personal realization” and thus with the body
of realization, while the dharmata buddha represents the truth
on which that realization is based and thus the body of truth. The
word nishyanda means “result” or “outcome,” but it also means
“to flow from.” Hence, some see it as referring to the result of
attainment while others see it as referring to its origin in the
dharmata buddha.
194 Akanishtha Heaven is the highest heaven in the realm of
form. It is also the place where buddhas are enlightened and
where they are said to attain their sambhoga–kaya, or body of
realization.
195 These four similes liken the purification of the mind to a
mirror that reflects without making distinctions, a light that
illuminates without making distinctions, all-inclusive
consciousness, and personal realization. In the last of these, the
word tun (all at once) appears in Shikshananda and the Sanskrit
but not in Gunabhadra or Bodhiruchi. It could be argued that the
reason it is omitted here is that the difference between “all at
once” and “by degrees” is no longer relevant.
196 Section XV. Each of the three buddhas mentioned in the
Lankavatara is associated with one of the modes of reality. The
dharmata buddha establishes the dependent reality of personal

realization, the nishyanda buddha reveals the imaginary reality
conjured by the mind, and the nirmita-nirmana buddha teaches
the perfected reality of spiritual practice.
197 Because the nishyanda buddha is said to arise from the
dharmata buddha, this buddha is sometimes called the
dharmata-nishyanda buddha. At the end of the next paragraph,
the Buddha reverts to the simpler term.
198 The three modes of reality include an imagined reality
(parikalpita-svabhava ), a dependent reality (paratantra-
svabhava), and a perfected reality (parinishpanna-svabhava).
Dependent reality is also referred to as pratitya- samutpada,
or the reality of “dependent origination,” which was the reality
realized by the Buddha the night of his Enlightenment—but not
before he had broken through the imagined reality of ignorant
beings as well as the perfected reality of the spiritual elite.
199 Just as a magician fabricates forms that people imagine as
being what they are not, thus does our repository consciousness
produce our world of objects as well as our sensory bodies,
both of which we imagine to be real, out of the seeds of habit-
energy from past discriminations that we once more imagine as
being what they are not.
200 Transcending appearances of the mind, the dharmata
buddha does not teach, does not speak, but only establishes the
buddha realm on which personal realization is based.
201 Here and elsewhere, Gunabhadra translates this as hua-fo
(apparition buddha). This is the buddha that appears in the
world.
202 The Sanskrit is niralamba.
203 Section XVI. The attainments of shravakas and
bodhisattvas are compared. Although both are capable of

attaining the truths associated with personal realization,
shravakas remain attached to the self-existence of dharmas and
thus are not free of the habit-energy of such projections and the
endless round of existence it entails, however subtle.
204 The Four Noble Truths are the truths meant here.
205 The Sanskrit is acintya-parinati-cyuti. Death and rebirth
so subtle it is barely noticed.
206 This is apparently a reference to early Hinayana sects, such
as the Sarvastivadins, who believed all dharmas contained
something that was not subject to creation or destruction.
207 I have followed Shikshananda in inverting the order of the
last two sentences.
208 Section XVII. This section makes my head hurt. The
Buddha contrasts the ultimate reality of personal realization with
the “first causes” of other paths and thankfully moves on.
209 The Sanskrit is nitya-acintya (eternal-inconceivable). This
expression was used by other schools as an appellation for the
creator or for other “first causes.”
210 The Sanskrit karana means “cause,” but it also means
“creator” and thus “first cause.”
211 Amen.
212 Section XVIII. Not only do followers of other paths cling
to nihilistic views, shravakas do, too. Compounding their
misunderstanding of samsara (wandering, birth, and death), they
misunderstand nirvana (no breath, extinction), and finally
misunderstand the teaching of citta-matra (mind-only) meant to
liberate them, seeing it as nothingness. The Buddha points
instead to the projections that comprise repository
consciousness as the source of the problem and to their
transformation into correct knowledge through personal

realization, not through nihilistic practices.
213 The Sanskrit has “they do not know the difference between
samsara and nirvana.” Suzuki saw the problem with this and
rendered it “they do not know that birth-and-death and Nirvana
are not to be separated the one from the other,” changing the
text’s avishasajnah to avishasajnah.
214 People talk of differences among the shravaka, pratyeka-
buddha and bodhisattva paths, but differences are only
conceptual. Such people also misunderstand “the projection-
free realm” as another form of nihilism. Although the “three
paths” are normally understood as referring to those of
shravakas, prateyka-buddhas, and bodhisattvas, the Buddha
defines them elsewhere in this sutra as a path for gods and
Brahma, a path for shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas, and a
path for tathagatas.
215 Gunabhadra omits the negative pu (not) in this sentence.
However, it is present in the translations of Bodhiruchi and
Shikshananda and present as an equivalent negative in the
Sanskrit and seems called for here.
216 Section XIX. Not only is cessation an illusion, so is birth.
Ignorant people believe in existence and nonexistence, that
things come into existence, persist, then cease to exist. The
buddhas teach that things neither exist nor do not exist. What
seems to exist or not to exist are projections of things as existing
or not existing. Things themselves do not arise. There are no
such things as things, only the projections of things. Instead of
arguing that things arise as the result of causes, and because they
do not exist by themselves they are empty of self-existence, and
because they are empty of self-existence, they neither arise nor
cease, the Lankavatara sees this as the long way around and

simply denies that anything arises in the first place. Arising is a
delusion. Nothing arises. The relevance of the Buddha’s
discussion of dharmas and non-dharmas at the end of Chapter
One becomes clearer now.
217 A popular saying among Buddhist masters comes to mind:
“Outside of the mind, there are no things. Outside of things,
there is no mind.”
218 The repository consciousness has no form; it is the grasping
and the grasped that have form. Once transformed, another
name for the repository consciousness is the Great Perfect
Mirror Mind.
219 Section XX. The concept of lineage (gotra) was and still is
important in Indian culture and law. It is through such means that
people establish their identity. Although the Buddha associates
the first three lineages with the three paths, his intent here is to
go beyond the paths to the realizations on which they are based
and to emphasize that buddhahood is open to all. What lies in
the background here is the importance of the teachers with
whom one comes into contact and not their doctrines. Also, this
is aimed at instilling an awareness of how to adjust one’s own
instruction of others.
220 According to commentators, these lineages of realization
(abhisamaya-gotra ) are based upon the habit-energy from
what one has learned in the past: upon hearing the expedient
teachings taught by a nirmana buddha, one joins the shravaka
lineage; upon hearing the teaching of dependent origination
taught by a nishpanna-nirmitta buddha, one joins the pratyeka-
buddha lineage; upon hearing the teaching of detachment taught
by the dharmata buddha, one joins the tathagata lineage; upon
hearing all three teachings and believing and doubting at the

same time, one joins the indeterminate lineage; and not believing
any of these teachings, one joins the distant lineage.
221 Gunabhadra’s Sanskrit text apparently had bhinna-gotra
(distant lineage—as in “distant relation”), not a-gotra (non-
lineage—as in “no relation”), which is what all other texts have.
Gunabhadra’s text, I feel, is superior here, as the Buddha does
not support the exclusion of anyone from access to a lineage of
realization, even those who reject the basis for such a lineage, as
the icchantikas do in Section XXII.
222 It was while cultivating dependent origination (pratitya-
samutpada) that Shakyamuni experienced enlightenment.
223 Gunabhadra has “the eighth stage.” But the attainments
listed here do not correspond to that stage of the bodhisattva
path, as described by Gunabhadra elsewhere in his translation.
In this case, I have turned to Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda, both
of whom have the “fifth and sixth stages,” which agrees with
what the Buddha says elsewhere in this and other sutras.
224 “Karmic deaths” refer to rebirth in accordance with one’s
karma, whereas, due to the vows made by bodhisattvas, their
subsequent rebirths transcend such perceptible realms.
225 Only Gunabhadra includes this first clause attributing what
follows to the fifth of the five lineages.
226 This refers to the Sarvastivadin school of early Buddhism.
The Sarvastivadins thought there was a substance that survived
death. Here, the Buddha provides an abbreviated list of
possibilities. I’ve followed Edgerton in reading posha as
equivalent to purusha, with which it is linked, and thus the
Chinese compound chang-yang-shih-fu as one term, namely
“individuality.”
227 This refers to the Hindu sect of the Vaisheshikas.

228 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda have yuan-chueh (pratyeka-
buddha). I’ve followed Gunabhadra, who has ke-pieh-yuan
(differing-conditions), referring to the twelve links on the chain of
dependent origination that begins with ignorance and ends with
old age and death.
229 Shikshananda and the Sanskrit texts combine the first two
of these four and thus list only three such lineages.
230 This refers to the three modes of reality (tri-svabhava):
imagined reality, dependent reality, and perfected reality.
231 This refers to the three modes of non-reality (tri-
asvabhava): form, life, and reality.
232 This is identified as the repository consciousness in the
translations of Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda.
233 Referring to the shravaka, pratyeka-buddha, and tathagata
lineages, and not the distant lineage.
234 Nirabhasa-bhumi. The eighth stage of the bodhisattva
path, beyond which the ninth and tenth stages are those of
buddhahood.
235 Whereby repository consciousness turns out to be the
tathagata-garbha, or womb of buddhas.
236 The point of this last sentence is that one’s path is not as
important as the lineage of realization to which one belongs.
237 Section XXI. Another case where the verses do not at first
seem to recapitulate the preceding prose section. But on a
closer reading, the first verse dismisses the goals of the shravaka
path, the second verse introduces the use of expedient teachings
while dismissing the goals of the pratyeka-buddha path, the third
verse turns to the tathagata path, and the fourth verse finds even
the highest meditative realms, be they Hinayana or Mahayana,
unequal to the teaching of mind-only.

238 These are the four heroes of the shravaka path: the srota-
apanna, who reaches the river of impermanence; the sakrid-
agamin, who is reborn once more; the anagamin, who is not
reborn as a human but among the gods; and the arhat, who is
not reborn at all.
239 Referring to pratyeka-buddhas, who cultivate in solitude.
240 Again, the realm free from projections is a characteristic of
the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path.
241 These are the names of meditations in the realms of form
and formlessness which some liken to nirvana.
242 Section XXII. Having considered the karmic lineages that
make buddhahood possible for us benighted beings, the Buddha
now turns to those who in some quarters are said to lack such a
possibility, the icchantikas. At issue here is whether or not all
beings have the buddha-nature. The Buddha offers a novel
solution. All beings have the ability to become buddhas. It only
takes instruction and the willingness to be instructed. Hence,
bodhisattvas cultivate patience. In fact, given their vow not to
enter nirvana until all others do so, some bodhisattvas assume
the guise of icchantikas in order to liberate them. As noted
earlier, icchantikas make up the “distant lineage” of Section XX.
They are distant relations, but still relations.
243 The word icchantika is derived from icchatva, meaning
“desire.” Thus, icchantikas refer to “pleasure seekers.”
According to the Buddha’s Four Noble Truths, desire is the
cause of suffering. Thus, devotion to desire is tantamount to
rejection of the Dharma and the possibility of liberation.
244 The first part of this section is handled differently in each
translation. I’ve followed Gunabhadra (and the reading of his
version by Tseng Feng-yi and T’ung Jun). Bodhiruchi has:

“Mahamati, what is the path of no lineage? It is that of the
icchantika? Mahamati, icchantikas have no potential for nirvana.
And why not? They don’t believe in liberation, so they don’t
enter nirvana.” Shikshananda has: “Furthermore, Mahamati, why
do the icchantikas among these (apparently referring to the
indeterminate lineage of the previous section) have no desire or
delight for liberation? Because they have forsaken their good
roots or because they have made vows concerning beings
without beginning?”
245 This sentence is only present in Gunabhadra and
Bodhiruchi.
246 Good roots (kushala-mula) produce good fruit (kushala
phala). The “good fruit” of Buddhism is buddhahood. Thus,
“good roots” include thoughts, words, or deeds of compassion
and wisdom that give rise to such a fruit.
247 This refers to the bodhisattva-pitaka, or those canonical
texts of Mahayana Buddhism that extol the bodhisattva, who
takes the vow to liberate all beings as the proper goal of
practice, as opposed to the arhat, who seeks only to enter
nirvana. When the Mahayana first developed, its supporters
often felt obliged to defend the authenticity of its teachings.
248 The vinaya refers to that part of the Buddhist canon that
deals with moral discipline.
249 Section XXIII. Resuming his review of the major teachings
bodhisattvas were expected to understand, the Buddha
introduces the three modes of reality, which he summarizes
according to their relationships to the five dharmas. They are,
after all, two different ways of looking at the same thing, namely,
the world we perceive and think of as real: one based on
projection, the other based on correct knowledge.

250 The three modes of reality (tri-sva-bhava) include
imagined reality, (parikalpita), dependent reality (paratantra),
and perfected reality (parinishpanna). The three modes do not
refer to separate realities. They simply represent the three ways
we perceive what is real. In imagined reality, we mistakenly
perceive things as separate from other things. In dependent
reality, we correctly perceive things as dependent on other
things, but we still perceive the world in terms of things which
are themselves fictions. In perfected reality, we neither perceive
nor do not perceive things, for things neither exist nor do not
exist. In perfected reality, we dwell in the realm of the tathagata-
garbha.
251 Gunabhadra puts this question in Mahamati’s mouth, but it
does better as a rhetorical question, which is how it appears in
the translations of Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda and also in the
Sanskrit.
252 Gunabhadra reverses the order and attribution of “name”
and “appearance,” apparently by mistake. I’ve gone along with
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit texts in placing
“appearance” first, followed by “name.”
253 The “ground” of dependent reality is the eighth, or
repository, consciousness, which supplies the “names.” The
“objective support” includes the remaining seven forms of
consciousness, including the five sensory-based forms of
consciousness, which supply the “appearances.” The Sanskrit
for “ground” is ashraya and for “objective support” is
alambana.
254 The tathagata–garbha, or womb of buddhas, is the name
applied to the repository consciousness when it is transformed.
255 Gunabhadra and Shikshananda render this verse with four-

character lines, instead of the usual five-character lines.
256 The relationship between the five dharmas and the three
modes of reality, as described in the above verse and elsewhere
in this sutra, connects name and appearance to imagined reality,
projection to dependent reality, and true knowledge and
suchness to perfected reality. For more on these, see Sections
LXXXIII & LXXXIV
257 The reference here is to perfected reality. It should be
noted, however, that elsewhere (at the end of the third
paragraph in the next section, for example) the Buddha says that
personal realization involves transcending the five dharmas and
the three modes of reality, which would include the perfected
mode as well.
258 Section XXIV. The Buddha completes his review of the
major teachings in which bodhisattvas are expected to be versed
with the two kinds of no-self. The skandhas, dhatus, and
ayatanas are simply different ways of breaking down one’s
experience of awareness in search of a self. The skandhas
include the external world of form and the internal worlds of
sensation, perception, memory, and consciousness. The dhatus
include the six powers of sensation, the six domains of sensation,
and the six forms of consciousness that arise upon their
conjunction. The ayatanas include only the six powers and six
domains. Not only does the Buddha deny the existence of
anything permanent among such dharmas as the skandhas, he
also denies that the skandhas, or anything else, are themselves
permanent, or “self-existent.”
259 Other paths located the self in the skandha of
consciousness and what belongs to the self among the remaining
four skandhas.

260 I’ve followed Bodhiruchi who is somewhat clearer in his
reading of garbha as referring to “house” than Gunabhadra.
Shikshananda reads this as referring to the repository
consciousness, as does Suzuki.
261 The Sanskrit is niriha, which means “indifferent.” This term
is absent in Bodhiruchi’s translation, but Shikshananda translates
it wu-neng-tso (no ability to create).
262 The attribution of individual or shared characteristics was
often used as a way of slipping in a self through the back door.
263 In the previous section, we were told that personal
realization of buddha knowledge takes place in the realm of
perfected reality. Here, we learn that this, too, is merely another
way of looking at things and that one must leave this behind as
well.
264 I read this as referring to the eighth stage of the bodhisattva
path, which is marked by freedom from projections and which is
where shravakas and bodhisattvas usually part company. If the
eighth stage is the initial stage of the bodhisattva path, then the
ninth stage would be its final stage, as the Buddha says here that
bodhisattvas who reach the tenth stage have “gone beyond the
bodhisattva stage.”
265 The ninth stage is called the good wisdom stage, and the
tenth stage is called the dharma cloud stage. They are
traditionally listed as the last two stages of the bodhisattva path.
266 A monarch with universal dominion.
267 Section XXV. This section follows from the previous one
and examines the four aspects from which a self can be
postulated to exist or not to exist. The Buddha rejects both sides
of this issue. This is because the aspects that are asserted or
denied neither exist nor do not exist. They exist as words, as

concepts, but not as anything real.
268 Gunabhadra, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all render this
in six lines, while Bodhiruchi has it in four lines.
269 Comparing similarities and differences is the means
whereby individual or shared characteristics are determined.
270 Assertions of characteristics are usually associated with the
vaishe shikas, and assertions of views with the Sarvastivadins.
271 Everything arises due to the repository consciousness.
Thus, everything arises from delusions, not causes and
conditions.
272 The division of our experience into dharmas, and thus the
creation of the Abhidharma, or Study of Dharmas, began shortly
after the Buddha’s Nirvana. According to this scheme, these
entities of the mind were either created or conditioned, that is,
dependent on other dharmas for their existence, or they were
uncreated. Space, two kinds of cessation, and nirvana were the
only dharmas that qualified as uncreated or unconditioned
according to the sects.
273 Strands of hair before the eyes usually refer to what we call
“floaters” on the surface of the eye.
274 Assertions of cause and of existence were made by
Hinayana sects, whereby the assertion of cause concerned
practice and the assertion of existence concerned its fruit. For
Hinayana sects, space, cessation, and nirvana were viewed as
goals of practice.
275 Section XXVI. Having mastered the preceding teachings,
bodhisattvas now go beyond the eighth stage and begin their
own careers as teachers of the Dharma, in particular the Dharma
as taught by this sutra. The emphasis here is not on what
bodhisattvas attain but on what they do to help others.

276 The point seems to be that they adjust their appearance to
the needs of those they would teach.
277 The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, or community of
practitioners.
278 Gunabhadra renders this in four-character lines, rather than
his standard five-character lines.
279 Section XXVII. The Buddha now examines the basic
teachings common to all sects of Mahayana Buddhism,
beginning with emptiness. But as he says here, “Mahamati, it is
because people are attached to an imagined reality that we
speak of emptiness.” The same holds for the other teachings
covered here: non-arising, non-duality, and the absence of self-
existence. Thus, at the end of this section, he advises his
followers to trust truth and not words, including words such as
“emptiness.”
280 At the heart of Mahamati’s question is whether these
teachings by negation do not lead to nothingness instead of to
the somethingness of enlightenment.
281 If it weren’t for deluded people, there would be no
buddhas.
282 The Buddha uses the word “briefly” here because in other
sutras he lists as many as twenty kinds of emptiness.
283 The term paraspara means reciprocal but, like anyonya, it
also means contrasting, which is how I read it here. It is contrast
and combination (samuha) that establish individual or shared
characteristics.
284 Phenomena (pracarita) refer to conditioned, or created,
dharmas, such as the skandhas, while non-phenomena
(apracarita) refer to unconditioned, or uncreated, dharmas,
such as space, cessation, and nirvana.

285 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit have variations
of: “By the emptiness of non-phenomena is meant that the
skandhas are in nirvana and devoid of phenomena.”
286 The Sanskrit is nir-abhilapya.
287 The Sanskrit is paramartha-aryajnana-mahashunyata.
To this, Gunabhadra adds “of all things” (yi-ch’ieh-fa), both
here and at the end of this paragraph, but this is not supported
by Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, or the Sanskrit, and I have
omitted it as extraneous.
288 Although the previous forms of emptiness were used by
various Buddhist sects, the emptiness of mutual exclusion was
limited to logicians of heterodox sects. The example the Buddha
uses here refers to a vihara, or retreat center, donated by one of
his disciples, a woman known as Mrigaramatri (the mother of
Mrigara). Because she wanted to show her respect for the three
treasures, she donated a large piece of land northeast of
Shravasti and built a residence for a thousand monks for their
use during the rainy season. To insure its cleanliness, animals
were not allowed within the compound. In the Small Sutra on
Emptiness, which is part of the Madhyamagama, the Buddha
uses the example of this vihara to show the absurdity of the
conception of emptiness held by heterodox practitioners,
whereby something was said not to be empty if it was not
present.
289 This is the crudest kind of emptiness because it merely
excludes this from that, it does not lead practitioners to an
understanding of the other kinds of emptiness listed here, much
less to an understanding of non-arising, non-duality, or the
absence of self-existence.
290 Hinayana practice focuses on the cultivation of samadhis

that involve the cessation of thought and thus the non-arising of
thought. Here, non-arising doesn’t refer to the non-arising of
thought but to the non-arising of anything that can be identified
as separate from the causes and conditions by means of which
we say it arises. But saying that something arises does not mean
there is something that exists apart from causes and conditions.
Arising and non-arising are both fictions.
291 If one thing cannot be established, how can we possibly
establish two things?
292 Most Chinese commentators take these three as examples
of how we discriminate the day. Like samsara and nirvana, they
are neither inside nor outside of each other, nor are they identical
to each other. They are mutually exclusive and merely erroneous
projections.
293 Shikshananda has, “They only exist relative to each other
and cannot exist alone. Outside of samsara there is no nirvana.
And outside of nirvana there is no samsara. Samsara and
nirvana are not separate. And as with samsara and nirvana, the
same is true of everything else. This is what is meant by non-
dual.”
294 Section XXVIII. Previously, Mahamati wonders if the
Buddha’s teaching is not nihilistic, now he wonders if the
Buddha’s teaching is not eternalistic, and if the teaching of the
tathagata-garbha does not run counter to the foregoing teachings
of emptiness, non-arising, and no self. The Buddha explains how
the tathagata-garbha is not the same as a self but rather an
expedient means used to attract those who cling to a self by
providing something less frightening than no self.
295 In this sutra, the tathagata-garbha (womb of buddhas) is
treated as the same as the alaya-vijnana (repository

consciousness), two sides of the same coin. Elsewhere, it is
linked with the dharma body: hidden, it’s the tathagata-garbha,
visible, it’s the dharma body.
296 The bodies of all buddhas are said to be marked by thirty-
two physical attributes, such as long arms and long earlobes,
webbed fingers and toes, a swastika in the middle of the chest, a
curl between the brows, and eyes the shape of a crescent moon.
In the case of the tathagata-garbha, however, physical attributes
no longer apply, and a series of epithets are used instead, such
as emptiness, etc.
297 This is one of nine similes used in the Tathagatagarbha
Sutra. Others liken the tathagata-garbha to gold in a mine or
seeds in a flower.
298 These are also known as the three poisons.
299 The Buddha varies his description of the tathagata-garbha
depending on the attachments of his audience. For those
attached to existence, the tathagata-garbha is empty, formless,
or intentionless. For those attached to nonexistence, the
tathagata-garbha is the realm of reality, the dharma nature, or the
dharma body. For those attached to existence and nonexistence,
it is nirvana, the absence of self-existence, or what neither arises
nor ceases. And for those attached to neither existence nor
nonexistence, it is original quiescence or intrinsic nirvana.
300 The gate of threefold liberation includes emptiness,
formlessness, and intentionlessness. As the Buddha notes earlier
in this section, these are also other names for the tathagata-
garbha.
301 The Sanskrit is tathagata-nairatmya-garbha.
302 Section XXIX. Short though this section is, the Buddha
manages to list the major conceptions of a self held by other

paths: something that continues from one life to the next,
something that results from a combination of matter and
conditions, or something created by an outside force, all of
which are nothing more than fictions.
303 Gunabhadra alone renders this in four-character lines.
304 Section XXX. These are the highlights of the bodhisattva
path leading to the tathagata-garbha, beginning with seeing that
there is nothing to see other than one’s own mind (sva-citta-
drshya-matra) and concluding with the personal realization of
what buddhas know (sva-pratyatma-arya-jnana), to which is
added the means to teach such realization to others.
305 The practices of realization (yoga-abhisamaya) recall the
bodhisattva’s lineage of realization (abhisamaya-gotra) in
Section XX.
306 Sanskrit texts have abhilashanata (desiring), which is
reflected in Shikshananda’s translation. However, both
Bodhiruchi and Gunabhadra have le (delighting).
307 Although these four practices are usually interpreted as
sequential, they are also viewed as simultaneous, as becoming
aware of one’s own mind necessarily entails transcending
limitations of space and time and experiencing what can only be
experienced by oneself.
308 Gunabhadra repeats this sentence a second time in slightly
altered form. I’ve followed Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda,
neither of whom includes the repetition.
309 This paragraph is rendered quite differently by each
translator. As elsewhere, I’ve followed Gunabhadra.
310 This unusual term (mano-maya-kaya) is further explained
in Section LVII, where three projection bodies are mentioned:
one acquired during the third, fourth, or fifth stages of the

bodhisattva path, one at the eighth stage, and one beyond the
eighth stage, apparently at the tenth stage.
311 Gunabhadra omits “Mahamati asked the Buddha,” but this
is present in Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit. Hence,
I have added it. I’ve also followed Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda,
and the Sanskrit for Mahamati’s question. Gunabhadra has:
“What is the reason for the projection body?”
312 Section XXXI. It was the understanding of causation that
formed the basis of the Buddha’s own Enlightenment. Mahamati,
too, seeks to understand causation. However, from the point of
view in this sutra, cause and effect are considered in terms of
their origin as projections, not in terms of whether one exists or
not or what their temporal or spatial relationship might be.
313 The question revolves around this issue: does the effect
exist in the cause (simultaneous) or are they separate
(sequential)? The Sanskrit terms are krama (sequential) and
yugapat (simultaneous). Mahamati’s question anticipates the
Buddha’s answers.
314 External conditions make up the world in which most
people live, while they remain unaware that what exists in that
world and what causes it to exist are merely perceptions of their
own mind. Internal conditions constitute the world of Hinayana
practitioners (the “foolish people” here), unaware that what
exists and what causes it to exist are merely perceptions of their
own mind. Internal conditions are usually encompassed by the
five skandhas or the twelve links of dependent origination,
beginning with ignorance and karma (memory) and ending with
illness, old age, and death.
315 The subject of causality and different lists of causes fill the
texts of every Buddhist sect. This particular list is apparently

unique to this sutra.
316 Referring to the latent habit-energy of the repository
consciousness.
317 Yin-shun gives the example of the sun. After it goes down,
it is the inactive cause of its reappearance.
318 This set of four causes, which considers causation from the
point of view of the effect, is common to early Hinayana texts.
319 All three Chinese translations and the Sanskrit render this
verse in six lines.
320 Section XXXII. Mahamati’s question here arises from the
last line in the previous section, where the Buddha says,
“Nothing exists at all / and these are nothing but words.” So
how are we to understand words, and where do they come
from? The Buddha says that words are based on projections,
and projections are a falsification of reality. Hence, to know the
truth behind words requires seeing through the falsehood of
projection.
321 The Sanskrit for “words” and “what they express” are
abhilapa (expression) and abhilapya (expressed). These are
the two kinds of truth (artha), the validity of which the Buddha
denies in the next section.
322 These four are associated with different forms of
consciousness: object projection with the first five forms of
sensory-based consciousness; dream projection with the sixth,
or conceptual consciousness; words for attachment to erroneous
projections with the seventh, or self-consciousness; and words
for beginningless projections with the eighth, or repository
consciousness.
323 Some commentators think “hostility” here is short for
“hostility and kindness.” But this is not supported by any of our

texts: the Sanskrit has simply shatru (hostility), Gunabhadra has
yuan (enmity), and Shikshananda has yuan-ch’ou (hatred).
None include “kindness.” Bodhiruchi chooses not to translate
shatru at all. However, the place of “hostility” here is clearer
when it is understood that it is based on the seventh form of
consciousness, or ego-consciousness. And wherever the ego is
involved, hostility, and not kindness, is the operant emotion.
324 Section XXXIII. What is the relation between words and
projections, between words and ultimate truth (parama-artha)?
Ultimate truth cannot be projected because it has no
characteristics. Hence, it cannot be expressed or revealed by
words. It can only be known by realizing that the projections of
words are nothing but the perceptions of one’s own mind. The
Buddha’s initial response here seems out of place. It also
appears in section LXV, where it fits better. Hence, its
appearance here is probably a copyist error.
325 Although Gunabhadra’s translation of this line is a bit
ambiguous, it is clearer in Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda, which
have variations of “Because projection is the cause of words.”
326 Section XXXIV. While this does summarize the foregoing,
Gunabhadra’s translation includes only these two verses.
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit include two more
and handle the second verse quite differently. Weaving their
versions together results in something like this: 2. “Whatever
exists has no self-existence / avoid the projection of words /
everything is a dream or illusion / neither samsara nor nirvana. 3.
Just as a ruler or elder / tries to keep his children happy / giving
them animals of clay at first / only later real ones (a story from
the Lotus Sutra about the use of skillful means). 4. Thus do I
teach my disciples / devices that make them happy / only later

do I instruct them / to realize the realm of reality themselves.”
327 The Sanskrit is bhutakoti, which means “the
boundary/limit/extent of what is real.” This term is sometimes
used as equivalent to nirvana, but in the Lankavatara it refers
to what transcends nirvana and samsara and points to the
tathagata-garbha as our primordial buddha nature. Here, all
three Chinese translators have shih-chi (limit of reality).
328 Section XXXV. The Buddha uses a series of twelve similes
to exemplify the unreality of the four possible standpoints on
which other paths based their sense of reality: this, that, either
this or that, neither this nor that. Of the twelve similes, the first
seven are directed to followers of other paths and teach that
perceptions of an external world are not real (thus there are no
views to get free from). The remaining five are directed to
Hinayana practitioners and teach that perceptions of an external
world are “nothing but mind” (thus there is no buddha
knowledge to realize).
329 This version of the tetralemma common to logical schemes
the world over (either x or y, both x and y, neither x nor y) will
be repeated throughout the rest of the sutra. While its use in
logic is usually intended to establish the validity of one of the four
possibilities, the Lankavatara uses it to dismiss all four.
Although the full tetralemma is only stated for the first series
regarding spatial reality, it is implied for the remaining two, which
concern conceptual and temporal reality.
330 Gandharvas are gods known for their skill as musicians who
are devoted to pleasure and who live in the sky. Thus, their
cloud-like cities are often used as a metaphor for illusions. While
the deer represent those who seek pleasure in the realm of
desire, the gandharvas represent those who seek pleasure in the

realm of form.
331 While the first two similes involve the first five forms of
sensory consciousness, dreams involve the sixth, or conceptual,
consciousness.
332 The reference here is to the seventh form of consciousness,
which Hinayana monks seek to eliminate in order to enter
nirvana.
333 The wheel (or firebrand) represents the wheel of birth and
death. This paragraph is missing in Bodhiruchi.
334 The raindrops represent nirvana.
335 This refers to the first six forms of consciousness, the
cessation of which was considered the prerequisite of nirvana by
Hinayana practitioners.
336 The three means to knowledge of Samkhya epistemology
include: accepted authority, inference or reasoning, and direct
experience.
337 The five-part syllogism of Nyaya logicians was a form of
argument aimed at discovering the truth by means of
proposition, reason, example, application, and conclusion.
338 Imagined reality and dependent reality are the two modes
of reality referred to here. The Buddha’s reference is to those
who think perfected reality is real, and the text can be read as a
critique of some Yogacarins in this regard.
339 This and the similes that follow are also taken as examples
of the teachings of apparition buddhas. Here, the Buddha is the
tree, and the minds of beings are the water.
340 This refers to a buddha’s mind, which reflects without
distinction.
341 This refers to a buddha’s oral teaching.
342 This refers to the appearance of teachings.

343 The Sanskrit is arya-pratyatma-jnana-vastu.
344 This refers to the five skandhas and other conceptions of
self-existence, including the body of a buddha.
345 Pishacas are demons who have the ability to make the dead
move as if they were alive. Here the pishaca is bhutata, or
reality, and the power of incantation comes from alaya-vijnana,
or repository consciousness.
346 And yet there is nothing attained, nothing abandoned.
347 This verse is expanded into two verses in Bodhiruchi,
Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit by applying these and other
similes to the five skandhas as well as to the three realms.
348 The “seeds of consciousness” refer to habit-energy in the
repository consciousness.
349 In Section LXVIII, the Buddha defines the three
continuities as referring to greed, anger, and delusion, which are
also known as the three poisons.
350 Referring to the skandhas, for example.
351 Section XXXVI. The Buddha does not teach any of the
four viewpoints that prevent personal realization of buddha
knowledge. In place of these, he teaches dependent origination,
the path, cessation, and liberation. His aim is practical, not
theoretical. He turns to whatever works.
352 This refers to the tetralemma, which is only spelled out in its
entirety for sameness and difference.
353 Basically, this is a restatement of the Four Noble Truths.
354 This refers to the Buddha’s 108 responses to Mahamati’s
108 questions: “a statement about x is a statement about no x.”
Teachings involving realms that are free from projections are
presented to lead people away from their beliefs in the existence
or the nonexistence of things.

355 The paths of shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas are for
eliminating the obstruction of passion, while the bodhisattva path
is for eliminating the obstruction of knowledge.
356 Tathagatas are likened to caravan chiefs because they lead
practitioners across the desert of barren knowledge and
because they know the location of the oases where they can rest
on their way to liberation. The paths and its stages, along with
the oases, however, are a mirage.
357 Section XXXVII. To eliminate the obstructions of passion
and knowledge of the previous section, the Buddha lists four
kinds of meditation, one for Hinayana practitioners and
members of other paths, one for beginning bodhisattvas, one for
accomplished bodhisattvas, and one for those who transcend
the bodhisattva path. Thus, the practice of meditation is viewed
here as sequential, with the last kind tantamount to what later
became known as “direct understanding.”
358 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit read this
differently: “until they reach the cessation of perceptions,” which
is the goal of Hinayana practitioners.
359 The Sanskrit is artha-pravicaya dhyana (meaning-
examination meditation).
360 The Sanskrit is tathata-alambana-dhyana (suchness-
based meditation). The object of this meditation is the teaching
itself as a projection.
361 No self among persons and no self among things.
362 The threefold bliss of samadhi, enlightenment, and nirvana.
363 The Sanskrit is patala, referring to that region of the
Underworld that is the home of serpents and demons.
364 After the kalpa-ending conflagration that destroys all
worlds.

365 All versions render this verse in six lines.
366 Section XXXVIII. Reflecting on the threefold bliss of
personal realization that marks tathagata meditation, Mahamati
asks about the bliss of nirvana. The Hinayana view is that
nirvana is the extinguishing of consciousness and the end of birth
and death. Here, the Buddha says nirvana is not something
outside birth and death but rather the transformation of birth and
death, the transformation of the eight forms of consciousness
into the four kinds of non-discriminating wisdom: the wisdom of
perfect accomplishment (sensory consciousness), the wisdom of
perfect observation (conceptual consciousness), the wisdom of
perfect equanimity (will or self-consciousness), and the wisdom
of perfect reflection (repository consciousness).
367 Permanence is a characteristic. If nirvana is free from
characteristics, it cannot be permanent.
368 If nirvana is what all buddhas realize, it cannot be
impermanent.
369 Of the dozens of dharmas listed by the various schools of
Buddhism, those that were considered asanskrita (uncreated or
unconditioned) included space, two kinds of cessation, and
nirvana.
370 The Sanskrit has “no meaning” (nirartha), but none of the
three Chinese translations agree.
371 That is, projections of conceptual consciousness.
372 Section XXXIX. Practitioners unable to transform the
habit-energy of self-existence continue to see nirvana in terms of
words or objective states and thus fail to realize nirvana.
373 Section XL. Even the most advanced bodhisattvas rely on
the powers of the tathagatas to assist and protect them, which
tathagatas accomplish by appearing before them during

meditation and by instructing them by means of wordless
transmission.
374 The Sanskrit is adhishthana: enabling or supporting
powers; Suzuki has “sustaining.”
375 Wordless transmission or empowerment is a custom
common to many spiritual traditions whereby the touching of the
forehead is considered tantamount to opening a third eye.
376 A samadhi marked by emptiness and the absence of form
and intention.
377 This bodhisattva appears in the Avatamsaka Sutra
(Chapter 26) and is supported by the Buddha in teaching the
Dharma at the beginning stage of his practice. The “initial stage”
of the bodhisattva path in this sutra is the eighth stage, where
shravakas and bodhisattvas normally, but not always, part
company.
378 The Sanskrit is paksha-vipaksha (with and without wings).
379 The tenth and final stage of the bodhisattva path.
380 Michelia champaca, a member of the magnolia family. Its
orange-tinted blossoms are used in the production of perfumes
in India.
381 Chief of the gods who dwell atop Mount Sumeru.
382 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda add “to transmit their
power.”
383 Based on usage here and elsewhere in this sutra, this would
include the eighth, ninth, and tenth stages of the bodhisattva
path.
384 Section XLI. Mahamati asks the Buddha to explain how his
teaching of causation differs from that of other paths and even
wonders if it is not inferior. The Buddha redirects Mahamati’s
attention to the source of cause and effect and the source of

views about them.
385 The Sanskrit is pratitya-samutpada. This was the basis of
the Buddha’s Englightenment and the focus of his early
teachings.
386 The meaning of this last phrase is unclear, or at least
ambiguous, in Gunabhadra. Bodiruchi interprets this “self” here
as referring to self-generated projections, which would be a
misunderstanding of the Buddha’s position in this sutra, while
Shikshananda reads it as referring to an underlying self-existent
substance of some kind, which is more likely.
387 The Buddha’s teaching of dependent origination, or twelve
links of the chain of existence, begins with ignorance and
continues with memory, consciousness, name and form (the
inside and outside of the “individual”), sense organs, contact,
sensation, desire, grasping, existence, birth, and old age and
death. The problem that Mahamati sees with this explanation of
cause and effect is that while ignorance is the cause of memory,
old age and death is the cause of ignorance. Mahamati sees
circularity as a non-solution.
388 The Sanskrit version of this classic formula is asmin sati
idam bhavati.
389 Mahamati sees another problem in the Buddha’s teaching.
Do things come to exist gradually or suddenly, as the Buddha’s
formula implies?
390 Mahamati sees the causation of other schools as simpler
and clearer: a supreme deity gives rise to things, and that is that.
Things do not give rise to a supreme deity. Nor does an effect
become a cause, as in the Buddha’s teaching.
391 That is, once the effect appears, it becomes the cause of a
new effect.

392 Section XLII. Having heard the Buddha speak of the
existence and nonexistence of external objects, Mahamati
wonders about their relation to words and suggests words
establish the reality of objects. The Buddha divests him of such a
view. Words are not connected to anything other than the
imagination that gives rise to them, and they are not essential for
communication, in this or in other worlds. So much for their
connection to reality.
393 Shikshananda omits this last sentence.
394 These terms were used by philosophers to argue about
existence and nonexistence.
395 This is one of the names of a buddhaland to the east over
which Akshobya Buddha presides.
396 This bodhisattva is often depicted riding an elephant and
known for his use of skillful means rather than doctrines in
teaching the Dharma.
397 The three realms of desire, form, and formlessness through
which one passes life after life. The reference here is also to the
burning house in the Lotus Sutra which foolish children refuse to
leave until the Buddha entices them out with carts.
398 Section XLIII. The Buddha explains delusion. The foolish
are misled by it, lesser practitioners try to annihilate it, and the
wise transform it into suchness. In the background here is the
Buddha’s teaching that beyond the mind there are no things and
beyond things there is no mind.
399 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda read this as a rhetorical
question and put it in the Buddha’s mouth. The contention that
speech was eternal (nitya-shabda) is traced back to
Katyayana, a Sanskrit grammarian and mathematician who
flourished about 150 B.C. and who held that the sacred

syllables of Sanskrit were indestructible and alone capable of
expressing the truth. The Buddha, however, is not interested in
the status of speech as eternal, but in delusion, of which speech
is an example. According to the Buddha, speech is eternal as
long as it is not a projection. As soon as it is a projection, it
either exists or does not exist and is not eternal.
400 By delusion (bhranti) is meant what the mind gives rise to.
When people add their projections to what the mind gives rise
to, they cannot help but misrepresent it. And in so doing, they
become attached to their misrepresentations. The wise don’t
add projections to what the mind gives rise to but accept it for
what it is, the mind. Hence, for them delusion becomes reality.
401 What humans see as water, pretas (hungry ghosts) see as
fire.
402 The Sanskrit is tattva.
403 Foolish people do not distinguish individual or shared
characteristics, only a world of objects. Such objects, however,
are delusions, mistaken judgments as to what is real. Shravakas
distinguish characteristics rather than objects but cannot see past
characteristics. The same is true for pratyeka-buddhas, who
seek to get free of such characteristics. Only those wise enough
to see “objects” and “characteristics” as delusions and merely
the perceptions of their own minds can remain detached from
them and cease creating the projections that conjure them into
existence. Delusions, for the wise, thus become real by means of
the transformation of their awareness.
404 The three modes of reality and the five dharmas are meant.
The Sanskrit for “suchness” is tathata. Earlier, the Buddha says
the transformation of the habit-energy of the mind is nirvana.
Here it is suchness. Just different words.

405 The reference is to the teaching of causation, but causation
that is traced back to a first cause.
406 Cataract removal, using curved needles made of gold, was
practiced in India even before Shakyamuni’s time.
407 Section XLIV. This section is a continuation of the previous
section. Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all read it
differently. As usual, I’ve followed Gunabhadra. Mahamati
wonders when the Buddha says everything is illusory if he is only
referring to the characteristics of things, if there is not something
to which the characteristics belong that is not illusory. Ignoring
the twigs and cutting to the root, the Buddha tells him that
everything is illusory because it isn’t real, that there is not
something other than characteristics—all of which, of course,
are the result of projection.
408 The meaning here is that it is only as dreams or illusions that
we can talk about anything at all.
409 Mahamati wonders if characteristics belong to something
that is not illusory.
410 Section XLV. The Buddha uses doctrines as skillful means.
They are didactic, not absolute. Thus, he teaches non-arising to
those who believe in causes, and he teaches existence to those
who might mistake non-arising for nihilism and forget about
karmic consequences. However, the teaching of existence does
not admit of self-existence but only the illusoriness of existence.
Thus the Buddha urges his disciples to see things as they really
are, the perceptions of their own minds.
411 Mahamati wonders if something does not arise, how can it
be illusory. Only Gunabhadra proceeds as if he understands this
last sentence. Bodhiruchi inverts the meaning: “ ... what arises is
not illusory.” Shikshananda gives up and omits the whole

sentence.
412 Samsara refers to birth and death and is the counterpoint to
nirvana. The Buddha’s teaching here is aimed at those shravakas
who would deny their own existence in order to get free of the
suffering of existence.
413 The Buddha talks of existence and rebirth as skillful means
to those not ready for the teaching of no-birth, of non-arising.
Thus, he urges them to do good deeds and accumulate merit so
that they will enjoy a good rebirth where they will hear the
teaching of non-arising once more.
414 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda omit ch’ao (transcend, rise
above).
415 Section XLVI. Over the past few sections, Mahamati has
shown that he is still clinging to words. Words, phrases, letters—
these are all traps for meaning. Once you catch the meaning,
forget the trap.
416 The Sanskrit is naman-pada-vyanjana-kaya (word-
phrase-letter-unit), where kaya (body) is glossed as sumukti
(combination).
417 The Sanskrit vyanjana refers to a written letter but also to
that elementary unit of linguistics known as a “phone,” which
includes consonants and vowels.
418 The Sanskrit pad means “foot.” Following footprints, the
animal is found. Following phrases, the meaning is discovered.
But once the meaning is discovered, words and phrases can be
forgotten.
419 The formless skandhas include sensation, perception,
memory, and consciousness: aspects of our awareness we can
name but cannot point to.
420 Section XLVII. Having dealt with speech, the Buddha now

deals with silence. During his years as a teacher, the Buddha
declined to answer certain questions as not answerable, such as
whether the universe is eternal, or whether the body and soul are
one or separate, or whether a tathagata exists after death. But
he also used silence when the question was not worthy of a
response. Here, however, his silence does not have so much to
do with the question as with the questioner.
421 These four possibilities, repeated endlessly throughout this
sutra, summarize the views of other paths whose validity the
Buddha denied. Thus, the Buddha taught his disciples to avoid
them. See also Section L.
422 Referring to the skandhas of form, sensation, perception,
memory, and consciousness.
423 Form and the formless skandhas (sensation, perception,
memory, consciousness) represent individual characteristics,
while whether the skandhas are permanent or impermanent, the
same or different, represent shared characteristics.
424 In the abhidharma matrices of various Buddhist sects, the
Sanskrit term samskara refers to anything created or
conditioned and includes everything except space and two kinds
of cessation and, according to some sects, nirvana. The same
term also refers to one of the five skandhas.
425 Referring to the four elements of earth, water, wind, and
fire, or of solidity, fluidity, mobility, and heat.
426 The Buddha only lists one possibility among the many
proposed by followers of other paths as to whether one’s
life/spirit is the same as or different from one’s body. As to the
origin of our life and body, followers of some schools attributed
them to our parents, others to a creator. Hence, it came down to
a matter of belief versus a refusal or inability to answer.

427 With those whose roots are mature, the Buddha speaks all
day without saying a single word. With those whose roots are
immature, the Buddha doesn’t speak and yet still speaks.
428 Section XLVIII. The Buddha returns to Mahamati’s earlier
claim that for things to be both non-arising and illusory is a
contradiction. The Buddha likens Mahamati’s attachment to
words to an elephant in a quagmire and considers the possibility
of responding with silence but decides to teach with direct
statements instead. Thus, he addresses the major contentions of
followers of other paths to which he often remained silent. Not
only do projections not arise, nothing arises.
429 Because a characteristic appears, there must be a time
when it was not present. Thus, it cannot possibly be permanent.
430 Because a characteristic appears, it is no longer rising.
Hence, its non-arising exists.
431 Thus, there is no need to look beyond what exists for what
does not arise or for what is permanent.
432 Of the following three verses, the first two refer to the
previous section. Hence, the separation of these two sections is
artificial.
433 Two prominent schools of Hindu philosophy.
434 Section XLIX. The Buddha introduces the four levels of
attainment that characterize the shravaka path. Although
shravakas are criticized throughout this sutra as not worthy of
emulation, in this section the Buddha treats their attainments, and
the relinquishing of their attainments, as stages on the path to
personal realization.
435 The two kinds of no-self include no self among persons and
no self among dharmas or things, while the two obstructions
referred to are those of passion and knowledge.

436 The first fruit of the shravaka path is that of the srota-
apanna. The term srota-apanna means “those who find the
river”—the river of impermanence.
437 These three are selected from a longer list of ten delusions,
which include five simple delusions: desire, anger, delusion,
pride, and doubt, and five acute delusions: belief in a body,
extreme views, heterodoxies, obsessions, attachment to codes.
In this case, belief in a body is an elementary problem suffered
by all srota-apannas, while attachment to codes bedevils the
advanced practitioner.
438 The Sanskrit is sahaja (born together, natural). The
meaning is that belief in a body is the fundamental ignorance with
which each life begins.
439 These are two of the three modes of reality, the third being
perfected reality. Belief in a body based on the skandha of form
is an example of dependent reality and is innate. Belief in a body
based on the four formless skandhas is an example of imagined
reality and is a projection.
440 This last clause is not clear in any version. I’ve followed
Gunabhadra, I think.
441 In this case, what exists is form and what does not exist are
the four formless skandhas. Their non-appearance would be
death.
442 There are three objects of doubt: reasoning, doctrines, and
teachers.
443 This refers to those who are reborn as a human in the realm
of desire once more, after which they attain liberation in one of
the heavens in the realm of form.
444 This refers to those who are not reborn in the realm of
desire but in the highest heaven in the realm of form, where they

then attain liberation.
445 All translations read this paragraph differently. I’ve followed
Gunabhadra.
446 This refers to those who are free from rebirth in any of the
three realms and who attain nirvana at the end of this life.
447 This is how Gunabhadra and Bodhiruchi read this
paragraph. Shikshananda reads it differently: “this refers to those
who attain meditations, samadhis, liberations, higher powers,
and masteries and whose passions, sufferings, and projections
no longer exist.”
448 These refer to the four boundless meditations (apramana
or brahma-vihara) in which practitioners give rise to feelings of
infinite friendship, compassion, joy, and equanimity and to the
meditations in the four formless heavens (arupya-dhatu).
449 The word mieh (cessation) is missing from Gunabhadra’s
translation. Apparently a copyist error, it appears in Bodhiruchi
and Shikshananda. It also appears in Gunabhadra’s summarizing
verse.
450 The highest of nine meditations (samjna-vedita-nirodha-
samapatti).
451 This poems also appears at the beginning of Section XXI.
452 Section L. Two kinds of knowing, one that functions in
private and leads to liberation, and one that functions in public
and leads to attachment. These also refer back, respectively, to
object meditation and beginner meditation in Section XXXVII.
453 The Sanskrit is buddhi.
454 This is quite a mouthful in Sanskrit: vikalpa-lakshana-
graha-abhinivesha-pratishthapika.
455 As elsewhere in this sutra, the tetralemma of four
possibilities is only applied to the first series. The reader is

expected to fill in the missing possibilities: namely, “both
existence and nonexistence” and “both permanence and
impermanence, and neither permanence nor impermanence.”
456 These comprise the syllogistic logic used by other paths to
establish what is real. Here, however, “characteristics” have
been added to the standard trio of proposition, reason/cause,
and example/metaphor.
457 The dharma cloud (dharma-megha) stage is the tenth and
final stage of the bodhisattva path.
458 This is not a reference to the ten vows made by
bodhisattvas at the beginning of the path but to a different set of
vows made at the end of the path. Focused on the liberation of
beings, they begin with: “If beings are inexhaustible, my vow is
inexhaustible.” The same vows are then applied to worlds,
space, the realm of reality, nirvana, the appearances of buddhas,
the knowledge of a tathagata, the objects of the mind, the realms
entered by buddha knowledge, and the knowledge that turns the
wheel of the Dharma.
459 This list of attainments is a short version of a longer list that
appears in the Mahayana Samparigraha Shashtra. This last
sentence also presents in summary form the characteristics of the
three bodies of every buddha.
460 Section LI. The nature of what we consider the material
world is explained differently by different schools, Buddhist or
otherwise. But a common concept in all their explanations is that
of the four elements: water, heat, wind, and earth as the basis of
the material world. The Buddha does not deny the material
world, only that the way we identify and thus know objects in
that world, including the world itself, is a product of our minds.
This section, thus, refers back to “object meditation” of Section

XXXVII.
461 The Sanskrit is bhuta (or maha-bhuta) for the elements
and bhautika for the elemental forms compounded of the
elements, namely the five sense organs and the five sensations.
462 Name, appearance, and projection are the first three of the
five dharmas—the other two being correct knowledge and
suchness.
463 Consciousness here represents the four formless skandhas
(sensation, perception, memory, and consciousness), while the
four elements represent the skandha of form. The Buddha
mentions consciousness because, if the five skandhas were
created by the four elements, when the body dies,
consciousness should cease. But it doesn’t. Hence, the four
elements cannot be the cause of consciousness.
464 The reference here is to the skandhas and back to the
statement in the previous paragraph that the skandhas arise from
the elements.
465 The Sanskrit is bhava-linga-lakshana-grahana-
samsthana-kriya-yoga-vat. I’ve followed Gunabhadra, who
takes these as comprising the necessary concomitants of the
skandha of form.
466 Even if the four elements could be linked to the skandha of
form, they cannot be linked to the four formless skandhas of
sensation, perception, memory, and consciousness.
467 Section LII. Having said that the four elements do not give
rise to the five skandhas, the Buddha proceeds to review the
five skandhas, which turn out to be empty. And although the
skandhas or anything else that might be used to characterize the
individual are empty of anything that might exist by itself, they
also form the basis by means of which bodhisattvas help others.

468 At the beginning of this sentence, Sanskrit texts insert this:
“Because they lack anything on which to depend and because
they obstruct the practice of buddha knowledge.” However,
none of the Chinese translations follows suit.
469 Gunbhadra does not say what to get rid of. I’ve added
“projections” from Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda.
470 The Sanskrit is vivikta (separation/detachment), which is
also used with the meaning of nirvana in LXX and LXXVII.
471 The unshakeable (acala) stage is the eighth stage of the
bodhisattva path, which is marked by the forbearance of non-
arising. However, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit
text all have the distant journey (duramgama) stage, which is
the seventh stage.
472 The Sanskrit is mano-maya-kaya (mind-made body).
Some also call it the “astral body.” See Section XLVII as well as
Section LVII for more on this.
473 Section LIII. The Buddha reviews four heterodox views of
nirvana, all of which involve the end of consciousness. He then
presents his own view that it is the cessation of conceptual
consciousness. In Section XXXVIII, he says transformation of
consciousness is nirvana. Same thing.
474 These four kinds of nirvana present the progressive
cessation of the skandhas of form, sensation, perception, and
memory.
475 The consciousness that projects is also called conceptual
consciousness. It is the sixth form of consciousness whose
function is to conceptualize the sensations of the five forms of
sensory consciousness.
476 The Sanskrit for conceptual consciousness is mano-
vijnana.

477 The seventh form of consciousness is the will, or self-
consciousness. The Sanskrit is manas. Some commentators
interpret “seventh” here and throughout this section as referring
to “the seven” other forms of consciousness and not just to the
seventh. However, this section only talks about the sixth,
seventh, and the eighth forms of consciousness and not the other
five. Moreover, the Buddha nowhere advocates the cessation of
the eighth form of consciousness, only its transformation. Hence,
the last line of the text cannot be referring to “the seven” other
forms of consciousness.
478 Shikshananda misunderstands the thrust of this line and has
the seventh form of consciousness arising.
479 The Sanskrit for repository consciousness is alaya-
vijnana.
480 The will is the seventh form of consciousness in the scheme
of eight forms of consciousness.
481 That is, a body that survives from one life to the next.
482 The Sanskrit is citta-kalapa and refers to all eight forms of
consciousness. However, in this section only the sixth, seventh,
and eighth are mentioned.
483 This poem is handled differently by each translator. I’ve
read the entire poem as part of the commentary on conceptual
(projecting) consciousness that begins with the previous poem
and ends with the following poem.
484 Section LIV. Having said that the cessation of conceptual
consciousness, the consciousness that projects, is nirvana, the
Buddha now reviews a dozen types of projection. Once one
understands that the realms on which they are based have no
self-existence, projections no longer arise. And when
projections cease, one attains the personal realization of buddha

knowledge. Also of note here is the relationship between
imagined reality and dependent reality stated at the end of this
section and which dominates the subsequent section. Because
imagined reality is based on projections, and projections have
no self-existence, it is the same as perfected reality. This was not
lost on China’s early Zen masters who often turned to this
identity in their teaching.
485 Along with the dependent and perfected modes, this is one
of the three modes of reality. The Sanskrit is parikalpita-
svabhava.
486 In Section XXXIX, the Buddha says there are two kinds of
self-existence, one of which involves words and the other of
which involves objects. The twelve kinds of projection listed
here can be subsumed under these two headings.
487 Thus, projections concerning the teachings of buddhas are
meant.
488 Referring to the four elements.
489 If I have understood this correctly, and I’m not sure I have,
it would seem that the entities that have no cause are projections
of non-arising.
490 This “golden thread” was a term used by fortune-tellers in
India in reference to good fortune coursing through one’s life.
Bodhiruchi also has “golden thread.” However Shikshananda
and the Sanskrit have “needle and thread.”
491 Continuity here refers to the belief by followers of other
paths in a continuous substance that survives death.
492 This is aimed at Hinayana practitioners, who see samsara as
bondage and nirvana as emancipation.
493 This represents the position of Paramartha: that imagined
reality and dependent reality are connected. Hsuan-tsang’s view

was that they are not connected.
494 Section LV. The Buddha does not so much repeat what
was said in the previous section as expound on something that
appeared in the background, namely, the three modes of reality.
As before, he tells Mahamati to transcend projection. But
transcending projection does not mean going beyond it, for there
is no place to leave and no place to go to.
495 Imagined reality does not come from dependent reality. It is
a misperception of it.
496 Conventional truth is based on a material world, and
ultimate truth is based on the emptiness of that world.
Meanwhile, the truth of other schools is based on a creator or
first cause that is itself free from cause and is the origin of all
worlds.
497 This and the previous two comparisons refer to the three
modes of reality: imagined reality (someone who contemplates),
dependent reality (cataracts), and perfected reality (gold), all of
which turn out to be without self-existence and thus not realities
at all.
498 An example given by commentators for this last line has
flowers in the sky producing fruit.
499 This refers to the twelve projections of the previous section.
The Sanskrit text alone has “ten.”
500 The referent of this is uncertain. Some commentators say it
refers to mind, will, conceptual consciousness, body, world, and
seeds. Others cite the six kinds of causes listed in Section
XXXI: immanent, connecting, apparent, instrumental,
manifesting, and potential. My own sense is that it refers to the
five forms of sensory consciousness along with conceptual
consciousness.

501 The Sanskrit is tathata, the fifth of the five dharmas. That
is, they distinguish them without distinguishing them. There is
nothing outside of suchness.
502 This verse summarizes the relationships between the first
three of the five dharmas (appearance, name, and projection)
and the two modes of imagined and dependent reality.
503 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit insert the
following verse here: “If perfected reality was real / it wouldn’t
exist nor not exist / and if it neither existed nor not / where
would the two realities be.” I’ve based this translation on
Shikshananda’s version. Since it is missing in Gunabhadra and
does not follow from the previous verse, I have relegated it to
the notes.
504 Referring to views that attribute the origin of the world to a
creator or to some form of matter, rather than to projection.
505 This last verse summarizes the views attributed to other
paths which are still tied, whether they admit it or not, to the
duality of dependent and imagined reality.
506 Section LVI. The Buddha presents the teaching that
became the hallmark of Zen, that nonexistent projections and the
personal realization of buddha knowledge are one and the same.
This is the teaching of one path, the path that points directly to
the mind.
507 Gunabadhra adds an extra “as for the personal realization
of buddha knowledge and the one path” at this point. Since no
other edition follows suit, I’ve deleted it.
508 Buddhists consider Brahma the ruler of the three realms,
Brahmans consider him the creator of the world.
509 Shravakas seek to enter nirvana in order to put an end to
the endless cycle of life and death. Bodhisattvas vow not to

enter nirvana but rather to seek enlightenment and to liberate all
beings.
510 Shikshananda has “obstruction of knowledge.”
511 Gunabhadra has pu-li fen-duan-szu (not free of karmic
deaths), which most commentators think is a mistake for pu-li
pien-yi-szu (not free of transformation deaths), as elsewhere in
this sutra shravakas are said to be capable of transcending the
former but not the latter. Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda try to
avoid the problem with “have not yet attained imperceptible
transformation deaths,” which is supported by the Sanskrit. I’ve
decided to stick with Gunabhadra’s translation, as karmic deaths
are based on the habit-energy of karma, which has not yet been
eliminated. Hence, to speak of transformation deaths would be
premature.
512 Bodhiruchi has “one path.” Apparently a mistake.
513 This is my translation of wu-lou (Sanskrit anasrava), no
outflow, no misery, free from impurity. Normally this is a positive
term, but note the view expressed in verse 6, whereby one must
transcend even affliction-free realms.
514 The normal definition of the three paths is one for
shravakas, one for pratyeka-buddhas, and one for bodhisattvas.
Here, the gods of the various pure heavens along with Brahma
get their own path, while all Hinayana practitioners are lumped
together, as are all followers of the Mayahana.
515 The normal referents of the three liberations are emptiness,
formlessness, and intentionlessness. Here, the three paths are
apparently meant. In any case, whether paths or liberations,
none includes a self.
516 Passion and knowledge are the two obstructions.
517 After yu-hsi-fan-nao (remaining habit-energy passion),

Gunabhadra’s translation has yu (foolish), which is apparently a
copyist error for the graphically similar hsun (influence/force),
which is what Bodhiruchi has. Thus, the meaning is that the
influence of the habit-energy of the passions remains active, even
though the passions themselves have been suppressed.

CHAPTER THREE:
MORE QUESTIONS1

LVII2
The Bhagavan then told Mahamati Bodhisattva, “I will now tell
you the different characteristics common to the projection body.
Listen carefully and ponder this well.”
Mahamati said, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are three kinds of
projection bodies. And what are the three kinds? They are the
projection body that experiences the bliss of samadhi, the
projection body that realizes the essential nature of dharmas,
and the projection body whose natural state is motionless. Once
practitioners reach the first stage, they will obtain these three
bodies as they progress through the subsequent stages.
“Mahamati, what is the projection body that experiences the
bliss of samadhi? When those at the third, fourth, and fifth stages
experience the bliss of samadhi, their myriad thoughts become
still. Though they dwell in the ocean of the mind, the waves of
consciousness cease,3 and they realize that whatever they
perceive is nothing but their own mind and does not exist by
itself. This is what is meant by the projection body that
experiences the bliss of samadhi.
“Mahamati, what is the projection body that realizes the
essential nature of dharmas? When those at the eighth stage

contemplate and understand that all dharmas are illusory and
devoid of anything real, they experience a transformation of
mind and body and attain the Samadhi of the Illusory. And while
in this and other samadhis, they are adorned with the powers,
masteries, and knowledge of limitless forms that unfold like
flowers as fast as their thoughts. But like illusions or dreams or
moonlight on the water or reflections in a mirror, they are not
created of or by material elements, though they might seem to
be. With their every limb thus adorned by all manner of
attributes, they enter the buddha assemblies of every land,
where they become versed in the nature of dharmas. This is
what is meant by the projection body that realizes the essential
nature of dharmas.4
“Mahamati, what is the projection body whose natural state is
motionless? The realization that the characteristics of all the
teachings of all the buddhas are based on the bliss of personal
attainment, this is what is meant by the projection body whose
natural state is motionless. Mahamati, the contemplation and
understanding of the characteristics of these three bodies are
something you should cultivate.”
1. “My path is not a great path / nor is it instruction or
words / nor is it truth or liberation / nor is it a realm of
nothingness
2. The path of the Mahayana / includes the power of
samadhi / different projection bodies / adornments of self-
mastery.”

LVII6
Mahamati Bodhisattva then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan,
the Bhagavan has said that a man or woman who commits the
five avici deeds7 does not fall into Avici Hell.8 Bhagavan, how is
it that a man or woman who commits the five avici deeds does
not fall into Avici Hell?”9
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder this
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati said, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “What are the five avici deeds?
They are killing one’s father or one’s mother, killing an arhat,
disrupting the sangha, and maliciously drawing the blood of a
buddha.
“Mahamati, what is the mother of every being? It is desire
and joy together with the thirst to be reborn, on which one
depends as if on one’s mother. And ignorance is the father by
means of which one is born into the village of the senses.
Severing these two roots is what is meant by killing one’s mother
and one’s father.10
“And when the passions that lie hidden, like plague-infected
rats, are exterminated, this is what is meant by killing an arhat.11
“And what is meant by disrupting the sangha? When the

assembly of different characteristics that form the skandhas is
utterly destroyed, this is what is meant by disrupting the sangha.
“Mahamati, because the body of the seven forms of
consciousness12 is unaware that external characteristics, be they
individual or shared, are nothing but perceptions of one’s own
mind, one uses the merciless purity of the three liberations 13 to
behead the buddha of the seven forms of consciousness once
and for all. This is what is meant by maliciously drawing the
blood of a buddha. Mahamati, any man or woman who commits
such deeds, namely, the five unrelenting deeds, are themselves
called ‘unrelenting.’14
“Moreover, Mahamati, I will now tell you about the external
avici deeds, so that once you and the other bodhisattvas have
heard this, you will not be prone to foolishness in the future. And
what are these avici deeds? They are the five avici deeds I first
spoke of. Anyone who commits these cannot attain any of the
three liberations. But aside from such avici deeds as these, there
are also avici deeds manifested by spiritual power. This refers to
the spiritual power of shravakas, the spiritual power of
bodhisattvas, and the spiritual power of tathagatas, who use
their powers of transformation to manifest avici deeds in order
to encourage others who commit avici crimes to put an end to
their transgressions.15
“However, those who keep committing avici deeds cannot
avoid what is unrelenting. 16 Only if they become aware that
these are nothing but perceptions of their own mind, and they
abandon projections of a body and what belongs to a body and
attachments to a self and what belongs to a self, or they
eventually meet a good friend, can they escape their projections
of continuity in another existence.”

1. “Desire is the mother / ignorance is the father / the
buddha is consciousness of objective realms / passions are
the arhats
2. And the skandhas are the sangha / who is
unrelenting in their extermination / who commits these five
avici deeds / doesn’t enter Avici Hell.”

LIX17
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please
tell us about a buddha’s awareness. Bhagavan, what constitutes
a buddha’s awareness?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It consists in realizing that there
is no self in beings or things, in understanding the two
obstructions,18 in transcending the two kinds of death,19 and in
putting an end to the two kinds of affliction.20 This is what is
meant by the awareness of a buddha. Those shravakas and
pratyeka-buddhas capable of this are also called buddhas. This
is the reason I teach one path.”21
1. “Knowing the two kinds of no-self / ending the two
obstructions and afflictions / transcending forever the two
kinds of death / such is the awareness of buddhas:”

LX22
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, why did the
Bhagavan proclaim to the assembly, ‘I am all buddhas of the
past’?23 Or why in recounting the hundreds of thousands of tales
about his previous lives24 did he say, ‘I was once King
Mandhatri,25 a six-tusked elephant, a parrot, Shakra,26 and
Sunetra’?”27
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It was because of the four
uniformities that the Tathagata, the Arhat, the Fully Enlightened
One proclaimed to the assembly, ‘I was once Krakucchanda,
Kanakamuni, and Kashyapa Buddha.’28 And what are the four
uniformities? They are the uniformity of syllables, the uniformity
of voices, the uniformity of teachings, and the uniformity of
bodies.29 These are the four uniformities. It was on the basis of
these four uniformities that the Tathagata, the Arhat, the Fully
Enlightened One made such a proclamation to the assembly.
“And what is meant by the uniformity of syllables?30 This
means that whatever syllables are used in calling me a buddha,
those syllables are also used in calling all tathagatas buddhas.
The essential nature of the syllables doesn’t differ. This is what is
meant by the uniformity of syllables.
“And what is meant by the uniformity of voices? This means

that the sixty-four transcendent sounds31 that characterize my
voice, those sixty-four transcendent sounds likewise characterize
the voices of all tathagatas, arhats, and fully enlightened ones
and are neither more nor fewer nor different than the
transcendent sounds of the kalavinka.32
“And what is meant by the uniformity of bodies? This means
that there are no differences among the dharma bodies or among
the marks and attributes of the physical bodies of myself and
other buddhas. It is only in order to instruct beings in different
realms that we appear in different guises.33 This is what is meant
by the uniformity of bodies.
“And what is meant by the uniformity of teachings? This refers
to teachings regarding the thirty-seven elements of awareness
attained by myself and other buddhas. 34 In short, we all speak
the Dharma with unobstructed wisdom.35
“This is what is meant by the four uniformities. And this is why
the Tathagata, the Arhat, the Fully Enlightened One made such a
proclamation to the assembly.”
1. “Kashyapa and Krakucchanda / Kanakumuni was
I as well / by means of these four uniformities / I teach all
bodhisattvas.”

LXI36
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha: “The Bhagavan has
said, ‘From the night I attained perfect enlightenment until the
night I enter nirvana,37 between the two, I do not speak, nor
have I spoken, nor will I speak a single word, for not speaking
is how a buddha speaks.’ Bhagavan, why does the Tathagata,
the Arhat, the Fully Enlightened One say ‘not speaking is how a
buddha speaks’?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It is because of two truths that I
make such a statement as this. And which two? They are the
truth that depends on personal realization and the ever-present
truth.38 These are the two truths. It is because of these two
truths that I make such a statement.
“And what do I mean by the truth that depends on personal
realization? Whatever other tathagatas realize, I also realize,
nothing more, nothing less. But the ultimate realm of the truth
that depends on personal realization is beyond explanations or
distinctions and beyond dualistic terms.
“And what do I mean by the ever-present truth? This refers
to the way of the ancient sages. The Dharma Realm39 is ever-
present, like the nature of gold or silver. Whether a tathagata
appears in the world or does not appear in the world, the
Dharma Realm is ever-present. It is like a road that leads to a

city. Imagine a man walking in the wilderness who sees this
straight and level road leading toward an ancient city and follows
it to that city, where he enjoys whatever he desires. Mahamati,
what do you think? Did he make the road or that city’s
delights?”
Mahamati answered, “No.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “The ever-present Dharma
Realm of myself and all buddhas of the past is also like this. This
is the reason I say that from the night of my enlightenment until I
enter nirvana, between the two, I do not speak, nor have I
spoken, nor will I speak a single word.”
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “From the night of my enlightenment / until the night
of my nirvana / between these two events / I speak not a
word
2. Based on the self-realized and ever-present truths /
I therefore make this proclamation / all buddhas and myself
/ in nothing do we differ.”

LXII40
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please
explain what characterizes the existence and nonexistence41 of
things so that once I and the other bodhisattvas get free of the
characteristics of existence and nonexistence, we might quickly
attain unexcelled, complete enlightenment.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder it
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati replied, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are two things people in
this world depend on. They depend on existence and on
nonexistence. And as they fall prey to existence and to
nonexistence, they try to imagine escape where there is no
escape.
“Mahamati, how do the people of this world depend on
existence? They think the world arises from causes and
conditions that exist and it does not do so in their absence. It
arises from existence. It does not arise from nonexistence.
Anyone who would claim that,42 Mahamati, says the world has
no cause.43
“And how, Mahamati, does the world depend on what does
not exist? Once people think of desire, anger, and delusion as

existing, they imagine the nonexistence of desire, anger, and
delusion, that by not perceiving their existence, Mahamati, the
characteristics of their existence become still. Therefore, they
think because they don’t perceive the existence of desire, anger,
and delusion among tathagatas, shravakas, or pratyeka-
buddhas, they exist then don’t exist.44
“Mahamati, which of these are nihilists?”45
Mahamati replied, “Bhagavan, those who perceive the
existence of desire, anger, and delusion then don’t perceive it.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Well said. It is as you
understand, Mahamati. Not only are they nihilists in regard to
the existence and nonexistence of desire, anger, and delusion,
they are also nihilists in regard to shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas,
and tathagatas. And how so? Because afflictions cannot be seen
internally or externally, and because their existence is different
and not different.46 Mahamati, desire, anger, and delusion
cannot be seen internally or externally because desire, anger,
and delusion have no substance and because there is nothing to
see.
“It is not tathagatas, shravakas, or pratyeka-buddhas who are
nihilists. The essential nature of tathagatas, shravakas, and
pratyeka-buddhas is liberation because neither bondage nor the
cause of bondage exist. Mahamati, if bondage existed, the cause
of such bondage would be bondage. Mahamati, nihilists who
speak like this are referring to what has no appearance.
“Mahamati, this is why I say it is better to believe in a self as
big as Mount Sumeru than to give rise to the vain and empty
view of nothingness. Mahamati, the vanity of nothingness is what
characterizes nihilists. Falling prey to views and longings
regarding individual or shared characteristics,47 they don’t

realize these are nothing but the perceptions of their own minds.
Meanwhile, they see external existence as impermanent, as
disappearing from one moment to the next, and the continuity of
the skandhas, the dhatus, and the ayatanas as passing away.
And they imagine this is ‘what transcends speech and words.’
But this is what is meant by ‘nihilism.’”
1. “The extremes of existence and nonexistence /
these are realms of the mind / who purifies these realms /
stills their entire mind
2. When external realms are not perceived / their
cessation does not mean nothingness / everything is real /
as it is in the realm of sages
3. Things not existing then arising / or having arisen
then ceasing / or existing or not due to causes / these have
no place in my teaching
4. Not due to a buddha or some other teacher / not
me or anyone else / things arise when causes combine /
how could they be due to nothing
5. Who says things exist due to causes / then speaks
of their nonexistence / speaks of arising based on wrong
views / falsely imagines things existing then not
6. Who knows that nothing arises / also that nothing
ceases / who sees everything as empty and still /
transcends nonexistence and existence.”

LXII48
Mahamati once again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please
tell me and the other bodhisattvas what characterizes the way of
attainment,49 so that once I and the other bodhisattvas become
skilled in understanding what characterizes the way of
attainment, we will know its characteristics, and by knowing its
characteristics, we will quickly attain unexcelled, perfect
enlightenment and not be misled by speculations or the maras50
of other paths.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder it
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati replied, “May we be so instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Among shravakas, pratyeka-
buddhas, and bodhisattvas there are two ways: the way of
attainment and the way of instruction.51
“Mahamati, the way of attainment refers to the distinctive
characteristics of personal realization that transcend the
projections of speech and words, that lead to the passionless
realm and the stages marked by self-awareness, that are free
from erroneous speculations, that overcome the maras of other
paths, and that shine forth from inner awareness. These are the
characteristics of the way of attainment.
“And what are the characteristics of the way of instruction?

This refers to instruction in the nine types of teachings52 that is
free from such characteristics as sameness and difference or
existence and nonexistence and that uses means appropriate to
the person in teaching the Dharma to help others attain
liberation. These are the characteristics of the way of instruction,
Mahamati, and these are what you and the other bodhisattvas
should cultivate.”
1. “The ways of attainment and instruction / are based
on realization and teaching / those who see and distinguish
these clearly / don’t pursue speculation
2. Nonexistence as reality / this is what fools imagine /
but why do they imagine / nonexistence as liberation
3. Contemplate conditioned things / the cycle of
arising and cessation / the nourishing of dualities / mistaken
views and ignorance
4. This one thing is true / freedom from blame is
nirvana53 / view projections of the world / as illusions, as
dreams, as banana tree trunks
5. Though desire, anger, and delusion exist54 / there is
no person present / the skandhas arise from thirst / their
existence is a dream or illusion.”

LXIV55
Mahamati once again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please
explain what characterizes false projections.56 How do false
projections arise? What constitutes a false projection? And
where are false projections found?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Excellent! It is excellent that
you are able to ask the Tathagata about this for the welfare of
the many, for the happiness of the many, out of pity for all the
gods and people in this world. Listen carefully and ponder this
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati replied, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Projections arise when there is
attachment to the misperception of different objects. Mahamati,
because people are unaware that their attachments to
projections of what they grasp and of the one who grasps are
nothing but perceptions of their own minds, they fall prey to
views of existence and nonexistence in which they are abetted
by the views of followers of other paths and the habit-energy of
their projections. And as they become attached to different
external objects, the mind, and what belongs to the mind give
rise to the projection of a self and what belongs to a self.”57
Mahamati said, “Bhagavan, since projections arise when

there is attachment to the misperception of different objects, and
people are unaware that the projections of what they grasp and
of the one who grasps are nothing but perceptions of their own
minds, and they fall prey to views of existence and nonexistence
in which they are abetted by the views of followers of other
paths and the habit-energy of their projections, and as they
become attached to various external objects, the mind, and what
belongs to the mind give rise to the projection of a self and what
belongs to a self,58 since this is so, Bhagavan, when they fall
prey to the existence or nonexistence of different external
objects that neither exist nor do not exist and that transcend the
characteristics of views, Bhagavan, this is also true of ultimate
truth, which transcends the characteristics of measurement,
sensation, inference, analogy, and causation. Why on the one
hand, Bhagavan, does attachment to the discrimination of the
existence of an unreal object give rise to projections and on the
other hand attachment to ultimate truth not give rise to
projections? Are you not teaching a false doctrine of causation,
Bhagavan, when you say the one gives rise to them and the
other does not?”59
The Buddha said, “Mahamati, it is not true that one projection
arises and the other does not. And why not? Because
projections of existence or nonexistence do not arise.
Projections do not arise when the external objects that appear
as existing or not existing are seen to be nothing but perceptions
of one’s own mind.
“Mahamati, I tell foolish people that because the different
projections of their minds appear before them as objects; they
become attached to the existence of their projections. So how
do they get free of views of attachment to a self or what belongs

to a self and get free of the misconception of causation as cause
and effect? By becoming aware that their projections are nothing
but mind. Thus, do they transform their body and mind and
finally see clearly all the stages and realms of self-awareness of
tathagatas and transcend views and projections regarding the
five dharmas and modes of reality. This is why I say that
projections arise from the attachment to things that are unreal
and that once someone knows what is real they free themselves
from the various projections of their own mind.”
1. “Who says the world arises / from causes and
conditions / imagines the four possibilities60 / but doesn’t
understand my teaching
2. It neither arises nor doesn’t arise / nor both of
these nor neither / so why do fools imagine / the world’s
causes and conditions61
3. Who sees the world like this / neither existing nor
not existing / nor both of these nor neither / transforms their
mind and finds no self
4. Whatever exists does not arise / because it arises
from conditions / whatever results from conditions / is a
result and not self-existent
5. Nor does a result produce a result / twin results
are a fallacy62 / since twin results cannot occur / their
existence cannot be found
6. Viewing conditioned things / without support and
supporting nothing / as nothing but the no-mind mind63 /
thus I teach nothing but mind
7. Where only essential nature dwells / free from

existence and conditions / where existence is finally purified
/ this I say is nothing but mind
8. The conventional self is a fabrication / containing
nothing real / the skandhas, too, are fabrications /
containing nothing real as well
9. Equalities are fourfold64 / characteristics, causes,
and results / no self is the third / practice and practitioner
are the fourth
10. As the habit-energy of projections change / the
mind gives rise to a myriad things / an objective realm
appears outside / a world that is nothing but mind65
11. What appears outside does not exist / all the
things seen by the mind / your abode, body, and
possessions / these I teach are nothing but mind66
12. Transcending every view / free from conceiving
and conception / where nothing arises and nothing is found
/ this I teach is nothing but mind67
13. Neither existing nor not existing / free from
existence and nonexistence / the liberation of this mind68 /
this I teach is nothing but mind
14. Emptiness, suchness and reality / nirvana and the
Dharma Realm / the different projection bodies / these,
too, I teach are nothing but mind.“69

LXV70
Mahamati once again asked the Buddha, “The Bhagavan has
said that bodhisattvas should become versed in speech and
meaning.71 Bhagavan, how should bodhisattvas become versed
in speech and meaning? What is speech? And what is meaning?”
The Buddha said, “Listen carefully, Mahamati, and ponder it
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati replied, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “What is speech? It is the
combination of projections and of words that rely on the throat
and larynx, the tongue and lips, the teeth and gums, and the
sides of the mouth. And it arises due to attachment to the habit-
energy of the discriminations of one’s own and others’ words.
This is what is meant by speech.
“And what is meaning? It is what transcends all the
characteristics of projections and the characteristics of speech.
This is what is meant by meaning.72 It is thus in regard to
meaning, Mahamati, that bodhisattvas dwell in solitude and
proceed toward the city of nirvana as a result of their own
understanding of wisdom from learning, reflection, and
meditation.73 And once they have transformed their habit-
energy, they contemplate the distinctive characteristics of the

meaning of the various stages leading to the realm of personal
realization. This is what is meant by how bodhisattvas become
versed in meaning.
“Moreover, Mahamati, bodhisattvas versed in speech and
meaning regard speech as neither separate nor not separate
from meaning, and they also regard meaning and speech in the
same manner. If speech were separate from meaning, meaning
would not be expressed by speech. But it is by means of speech
that we understand meaning, just as a lamp illuminates forms.74
“Moreover, Mahamati, if someone becomes attached to the
meaning of such expressions as ‘neither arising nor ceasing,’
‘self-existence,’ ‘nirvana,’ ‘three paths,’ ‘one path,’ ‘mind,’ or
‘modes of reality,’ they fall prey to views of assertion and denial
—assertions of difference and projections of difference,
whereby projections appear like so many illusions. As with
illusions, fools imagine differences, not the wise.”
1. “Those who give rise to projections of speech /
assert all kinds of things / because of their assertions / they
spend their next life in hell
2. ‘The self isn’t in the skandhas’ / ‘the skandhas
aren’t the self’ / such conceptions are mistaken / ‘nor is
there no self’ as well75
3. As for ‘everything exists’ / which is what fools
imagine / if things were as they see them / they would see
the truth
4. And as for ‘nothing at all exists’ / pure and impure
both would vanish76 / things are not as they are seen / nor
are there no things.”

LXVI77
“Mahamati, I will now explain the characteristics of
knowledge and consciousness. For by becoming adept at
distinguishing
the
characteristics
of
knowledge
and
consciousness, you and the other bodhisattvas will be able to
understand the characteristics of knowledge and consciousness
and quickly realize unexcelled, complete enlightenment.78
“Mahamati, there are three kinds of knowledge: mundane
knowledge,
metaphysical
knowledge,
and
transcendent
knowledge. What is mundane knowledge? This refers to that of
all those ordinary people and followers of other paths who are
attached to existence and nonexistence. And what is
metaphysical knowledge? This refers to that of those shravakas
and pratyeka-buddhas who fall prey to longing for and
becoming attached to individual and shared characteristics.79
And what is transcendent knowledge? This refers to that of
buddhas and bodhisattvas who contemplate what is free from
projections and see that it neither arises nor ceases, that it
transcends categories of existence and nonexistence, and that
the tathagata stage and the absence of a self among persons and
things depend on the occurrence of personal attainment.80
“Mahamati, what arises and ceases is consciousness. What
neither arises nor ceases is knowledge.81 Furthermore, it is

consciousness that falls prey to characteristics and the absence
of characteristics and also falls prey to the causes of the different
characteristics of existence and nonexistence, while it is
knowledge that transcends the characteristics of existence and
nonexistence. Furthermore, consciousness is characterized by
increase, while knowledge is not characterized by increase.
Also, there are three objects of knowledge: the knowledge of
arising and cessation, the knowledge of individual and shared
characteristics, and the knowledge of non-arising and non-
cessation.
“Moreover, knowledge82 is also characterized by the absence
of obstructions, while consciousness is characterized by the
obstruction of countless external realms.
Furthermore,
consciousness is characterized by what arises from threefold
combinations,83 while knowledge is characterized by the
absence of anything self-existent. Furthermore, consciousness is
characterized by attainment, while knowledge is characterized
by non-attainment, for the realm of buddha knowledge that one
attains is neither present nor absent, like the moon in the water.”
1. “Consciousness accumulates karma84 / knowledge
examines dharmas / wisdom penetrates projectionless
realms / thereby attaining powers85
2. Consciousness is tied to objects / knowledge sees
how thoughts are born / from projectionless realms and
higher stages86 / this is where wisdom rises
3. Whose mind, will, and consciousness / get free of
all projections / who grasp the teaching of non-projection /
are bodhisattvas, not shravakas

4. Tranquil and supreme forbearance87 / the pure
knowledge of a buddha / these rise from the best of truths /
which transcends every practice
5. I have three kinds of knowledge / whereby the
wise reveal the truth / all concern projections / the things
that people cling to
6. Unconcerned with lesser paths / such knowledge is
free from objective realms / while from shravakas rises /
attachment to self-existence / transcendent and nothing but
mind / a buddha’s knowledge is pure.”88

LXVII89
“Furthermore, Mahamati, the views of change held by
followers of other paths come from their nine doctrines about
change. These include change of shape, change of characteristic,
change of cause, change of connection, change of view, change
of existence, change of perceptible condition, change of
perceptible function, and change of origin.90 Mahamati, these
are their nine views of change. It is on the basis of these that
followers of other paths produce their doctrines of change
concerning existence and nonexistence.
“What is a change of shape? This refers to the view that there
is a difference in shape. For example, when gold is turned into
utensils or ornaments, it takes on the appearance of different
shapes, although the nature of gold doesn’t change. This is how
anything that exists changes. And this is how followers of other
paths imagine change, up to and including their projection of a
change of origin. Something is not as it was. But neither is it
different. This is the result of projection. This is how anything
that exists changes.
“It is like the aging of milk and curds or of fruit and wine.
Followers of other paths imagine change where there is no
change. Something seems to be there and seems not to be there.
But it is merely the perception of their own minds of an external

entity that does not exist, which foolish people give rise to,
Mahamati, due to the habit-energy of their own projections.
Mahamati, though something seems to arise and seems to cease,
there is nothing there. It is like seeing an image appear in a magic
trick or a dream.”
1. “A shape that changes over time / four elements
and five senses / slowly rising in the skandhas / a fantasy
not knowledge
2. Sages regard what comes from causes / unlike
others imagine / the world that comes from causes / is a
city of gandharvas.”91

LXVIII92
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, would
you please explain the meaning of the continuity and non-
continuity of things?93 For once I and the other bodhisattvas
become adept at distinguishing the characteristics of the
continuity and non-continuity of things, we will better understand
how all continuities work and will not become attached to a
continuity because of how its meaning is expressed in words.
For once we are versed in the characteristics of the continuity
and non-continuity of things, and we transcend the erroneous
projections94 of language, we will know how to travel to all
buddhalands and to their countless assemblies, where our
myriad transformations will be marked by spiritual powers,
masteries, faculties, and spells and will shine like so many suns
or moons or magic gems upon the four elements with the
refulgent light of wisdom gained from the effortless exercise of
the ten inexhaustible vows.95 And wherever we dwell, we will
look upon everything as an illusion or a dream and will avoid
views characterized by the projection of a self. And upon
reaching the stage of buddhas, in every realm where there are
beings, we will teach whatever teaching they respond to and
lead them to transform themselves96 by accepting that everything
is like a dream or illusion and by avoiding categories of existence

and nonexistence and projections of arising and cessation or the
teachings of other paths.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Well said, well said. Listen
carefully and ponder it well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati replied, “May we be so instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Attachments to continuities
based on how their meaning is expressed in words are
limitless.97 There is attachment to the continuity of
characteristics, attachment to the continuity of conditions,
attachment to the continuity of existence and nonexistence,
attachment to the continuity of the projection of arising and non-
arising, attachment to the continuity of the projection of
cessation and non-cessation, attachment to the continuity of the
projection of a path and no path, attachment to the continuity of
the projection of the created and the uncreated, attachment to
the continuity of the projection of the individual characteristics of
the stages,98 attachment to the continuity of the projection of
attainment and of projection itself, attachment to the continuity of
the projection of categories of existence and nonexistence on
which other paths depend, and attachment to the continuity of
the projection of attainment of the three paths or the one path.
“Furthermore, Mahamati, foolish beings project continuities
other than these. But it is because of their projection of such
continuities that they are like silkworms making cocoons, using
the thread of projection to envelop themselves and others in
attachments to the characteristics of continuities of existence and
nonexistence.
“Furthermore, Mahamati, for those who see that everything is
still, there are no characteristics of continuity or non-continuity in
any of this. But it is due to the non-arising of projections that

bodhisattvas see that everything is still.
“Moreover, Mahamati, know that external entities do not
exist, that their characteristics are perceptions of your own mind
and free of projections. Accordingly, when you see that
whatever exists or does not exist is simply a perception of your
own mind and without form, continuities become still. Thus,
there are no characteristics of the continuity or non-continuity of
anything. Moreover, Mahamati, although others, given to
falsehood, think bondage and emancipation exist, there is
nothing in any of this to be bound to or emancipated from. And
why is this so? Because among what exists or does not exist, no
beings can be found.
“Furthermore, Mahamati, the ignorant possess three
continuities:99 greed, anger, and delusion, together with the
desire for happiness in a future existence. Because of such
continuities, there is the continuity of existence, and among these
continuities are links to the five destinies.100 However,
Mahamati, for those who put an end to continuities, there are no
characteristics of continuity or non-continuity.
“Moreover, Mahamati, because of the active grasping of
consciousness based on threefold combinations,101 continuities
arise without interruption. It is because of such active grasping
that continuities exist. Meanwhile, those who put an end to those
forms of consciousness dependent on threefold combinations
witness the threefold liberation102 and the non-arising of
continuities.”
1. “Projections that are false / these characterize
continuities / once you know what is real / continuity’s net

is cut
2. Fools don’t understand / they look for meaning in
words / like silkworms in cocoons / wrapped in their own
imaginations.”103

LXIX104
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “The Bhagavan has
said it is due to projections that we imagine the existence of
different things and it isn’t they themselves that exist but only the
projection of them that exists. Bhagavan, if it is only the
projection of them that exists and their own corresponding
existence does not exist, would not the affliction and purification
of which the Bhagavan speaks also suffer from nonexistence,
since the existence of whatever is imagined does not itself exist?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “So it is. So it is. It is as you say,
Mahamati. What is real is not what fools imagine as existing.
What they imagine as existing lacks any characteristic of its own
existence.
However,
Mahamati,
according
to
buddha
knowledge there is something that exists, something the
existence of which is known by means of the noble insight and
noble vision of the eye of noble wisdom.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Although those who are wise
thus know what exists by means of the noble insight and noble
vision of the eye of noble wisdom and not by means of any kind
of divine or physical eye,105 this is not what fools imagine,
Bhagavan. How then do fools get free from such projections if
they are unaware of a higher reality?106 For they are neither
deluded, Bhagavan, nor are they not deluded.107 And how so?

Because they are not aware of the existence of a higher reality,
and because they do not see what transcends the characteristics
of existence and nonexistence.108
“Bhagavan, the wise do not view what they imagine as real in
this manner because they do not consider the individual
characteristics of an external realm as external. Bhagavan, they
thus perceive the characteristics of self-existence as an imagined
reality and do not say it is due to the presence or absence of
causes but due to falling prey to views of existence and that
theirs is a different realm unlike that. But this is a circular
argument, Bhagavan, because the characteristics of self-
existence are not known. Also, Bhagavan, if the characteristics
of self-existence are not the result of an imagined reality, how is
their projection not a projection but rather a discrimination of
suchness?109
“Bhagavan, projections differ, and the characteristics of self-
existence differ. Bhagavan, because the characteristics of self-
existence and their projections are not the same, how do people
know what is not real if they don’t imagine anything? But you
say what beings imagine does not really exist in order to free
them from projections. Bhagavan, why prevent beings from
becoming attached to views of existence and nonexistence if
they then end up becoming attached to views of the existence of
the realm in which buddha knowledge functions? Why teach the
nonexistence of detachment110 and then teach the existence of
buddha knowledge?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “I do not teach the nonexistence
of detachment, nor do I fall prey to views of existence in
speaking of the higher reality of buddha knowledge. Rather, it is
to help beings who have been attached to existence since time

without beginning overcome their fears. To those attached to
views of the existence of a higher reality, I teach detachment,
Mahamati. I do not teach characteristics of self-existence.
Rather, Mahamati, I focus on the personal realization of
detachment, on transcending deluded views, on transcending
views of what exists or does not exist that are perceptions of
one’s own mind, on obtaining the threefold liberation, on being
marked with the mark of suchness, on examining self-existence
based on personal realization, and on transcending views of the
existence or nonexistence of what is real.

LXX111
“Furthermore, Mahamati, bodhisattvas should not maintain
the proposition: ‘Whatever exists does not arise.’ And why not?
Because the proposition about the existence of things would not
exist, and because its reason112 would be characterized by
arising. To state the proposition ‘whatever exists does not arise’
contradicts itself. The proposition ‘whatever exists does not
arise’ contradicts itself because the proposition would arise in
relation to something,113 and also because a proposition
concerning the non-arising of things would be among those
things, and because its cessation would not arise. Thus, to
maintain the proposition ‘whatever exists does not arise’ is
contradicted by the proposition itself.
“Mahamati,
as
for
the
proposition
‘existence
and
nonexistence do not arise,’ such a proposition would be among
the things that exist, although characteristics of its existence or
nonexistence would not. Mahamati, even if in regard to the
proposition of non-arising one could maintain the proposition
‘whatever exists does not arise,’ this proposition is contradicted
because the characteristics of its existence or nonexistence do
not arise. You should not maintain propositions. The five-part
syllogism114 produces numerous errors due to differing
characteristics and changing reasons and because they are

fabrications. Hence, you should not maintain propositions. As
with ‘whatever exists does not arise,’ likewise in regard to
‘whatever exists is empty’ or ‘whatever exists has no self
existence,’ you should not maintain propositions.
“Mahamati, bodhisattvas say instead, ‘Whatever exists is like
an illusion or a dream,’ because it is seen and not seen,115 and
because it is a mistake of perception. You should say that the
existence of everything is like that of an illusion or a dream,
unless it makes people turn away in fear. Mahamati, foolish
people are given to views of existence and nonexistence. Don’t
make them turn away in fear from the Mahayana.”116
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “There is no teaching and no self-existence / no
objects and no attachments117 / these are the projections
of fools / the misperceptions of corpses
2. ‘Whatever exists does not arise’ / this doctrine of
other schools is wrong / nothing at all arises / what exists
results from conditions
3. ‘Whatever exists does not arise’ / the wise hold no
such conception / because propositions arise from reasons
/ the wise get rid of them all
4. Like seeing through a cataract / the distorted view
through strands of hair / projections of existence / are the
misperceptions of fools
5. Fabrications fill the three realms / self-existent
objects don’t exist / fabricating self-existent objects /
projection gives rise to projection
6. The forms and objects of fabrication / utterly
confuse the mind / bodhisattvas who see past these /

dispense with all projections
7. Perceiving water where there is none / the result of
thirst and desire / fools are thus bewildered / unlike the
wise who see
8. The vision of the wise is clear / rising from
samadhis of the three liberations118 / beyond the reach of
birth or death / they wander in a realm of no projection
9. Practitioners dwell in a projectionless realm / free
from existence and nonexistence / where existence and
nonexistence merge / and the fruit of buddhahood grows
10. As for existence and nonexistence / as for how
they merge / because the mind doesn’t know / confusion
swirls inside and out / once you make them stop / your
mind will behold their identity.”119

LXXI120
Mahamati once more asked, “The Bhagavan has said
knowledge is not obtained from an objectified world because it
would consist in nothing more than the assertion of projections.
Since a projection that can be grasped does not exist nor does
the one who grasps, grasping does not occur. Thus, knowledge
does not arise, only the names of projections.
“But how is it, Bhagavan, is it because we do not perceive
whether the individual or shared characteristics of what exists
are different or not that knowledge is not obtained? Or is it
because it is obscured by the variety of the individual or shared
characteristics of what exists that knowledge is not obtained? Or
is it because it is blocked by mountains or walls or by the
elements of earth, water, fire, or wind that knowledge is not
obtained? Or is it because it is too distant or too near that
knowledge is not obtained? Or is it because of blindness or
dimness of wit or impaired senses due to immaturity or old age
that knowledge is not obtained?
“Bhagavan, if it is because we don’t perceive whether the
individual or shared characteristics of what exists are different or
not that knowledge is not obtained, then we should not speak of
knowledge but of an absence of knowledge because something
exists but isn’t perceived. Or if it is because it is obscured by the

variety of the individual and shared characteristics of what exists
that knowledge is not obtained, that too is an absence of
knowledge not knowledge. Bhagavan, knowledge arises where
there is something knowable,121 not where nothing exists. It is
because we encounter what is knowable that we speak of
knowledge. If it is because it is blocked by mountains or walls
or by the elements of earth, water, fire, or wind, or because it is
too distant or too close, or because of blindness or dimness of
wit or impaired senses due to immaturity or old age that
knowledge is not obtained, that too is not knowledge, but an
absence of knowledge, because something exists but cannot be
perceived.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It is not so. The absence of
knowledge is knowledge not no knowledge. I am not concealing
anything when I say that knowledge is not obtained from an
objectified world because it would consist in nothing but the
assertion of projections. When you perceive that what exists or
does not exist is nothing but a perception of your own mind and
that external existence does not exist, you know without
perceiving objects. It is because nothing is perceived that the
knowledge of something knowable does not arise. Even among
the three liberations, knowledge is not obtained. Those whose
discriminations consist in the habit-energy of beginningless
fabrications of existence and nonexistence would not know
something like this. They are unaware of such knowledge.
“Therefore, I teach that the ceaseless projection of the
existence or nonexistence of an external world of objects is
based on nothing but the perceptions of one’s own mind. But
because beings are attached to grasping the characteristics of a
self and what belongs to a self, they do not perceive that these

are nothing but perceptions of their own minds and give rise
instead to projections of knowledge and something knowable.
Because of such projections, they are unable to ascertain the
existence or nonexistence of anything external and base
themselves on nihilistic views.”122
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “‘There is an objectified world / beyond the reach
of knowledge’ / and ‘the absence of knowledge isn’t
knowledge’ / this is what those who imagine things say
2. ‘Something exists without distinctions / beyond the
reach of knowledge / too near, too far, or somehow
obstructed’ / this I call false knowledge
3. ‘Among the young, the old, or impaired /
knowledge doesn’t arise / yet something exists as
knowable’ / this, too, I call false knowledge.”

LXXII123
“Furthermore, Mahamati, foolish beings are confused124 by
the habit-energy of beginningless fabrications and projections.
And once they are confused, they do not easily understand the
way of personal attainment or the way of instruction. Because
they are attached to characteristics of external existence that are
perceptions of their own minds and attached to explanations of
expedience, they are not adept at distinguishing the
characteristics of a way of personal attainment that does not
include the four possibilities.”125
Mahamati addressed the Buddha, “It is, indeed, as the
Bhagavan teaches. May the Bhagavan please distinguish the way
of instruction and the way of attainment for us, so that I and the
other bodhisattvas will become adept at both, and so that the
foolish people, shravakas, and pratyeka-buddhas of future ages
will not be left wanting?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Well said, well said. Listen
carefully and ponder it well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati said, “May we be so instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “The tathagatas of the three
ages126 teach two ways: the way of instruction and the way of
personal attainment. The way of instruction means teaching the
different texts and sutras appropriate to the minds of beings.

This is what is meant by the way of instruction.
“The way of personal attainment is for practitioners who free
themselves from the different projections that are perceptions of
their own minds. This means not falling prey to categories of
sameness or difference or both or neither, transcending
completely the mind, the will, and conceptual consciousness,
and avoiding views of what brings about the personal realization
of the realm of buddha knowledge, which shravakas, pratyeka-
buddhas, and followers of other paths given to dualistic views
cannot possibly know. This is what I mean by the teaching of the
way of personal attainment. Mahamati, this is what characterizes
the way of personal attainment and the way of instruction, and
this is what you and the other bodhisattvas should cultivate.”
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “My teaching includes two ways / attainment and
instruction / instruction for beginners / attainment for
practitioners.”

LXXIII127
Mahamati again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, the Tathagata
once said, ‘Do not associate with those who engage in the
various kinds of materialist128 eloquence. Whoever associates
with them will embrace desires of the flesh129 and will not
embrace the Dharma.’ Bhagavan, why did you say this?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Materialists employ all manner
of expressions, arguments, metaphors, and embellishments to
attract and deceive foolish people. They do not accept the
personal understanding130 of what is real, nor are they aware
that their projection of what exists is a delusion. Falling prey to
dualities, they confuse simpleminded people and also harm
themselves and cannot escape their continuation in other forms
of existence. Unable to understand what are nothing but
perceptions of their own mind, they do not get free of their
attachment to projections of external existence. Thus, those who
engage in materialist eloquence do not escape deception and
confusion or the sorrows and afflictions of birth, old age, illness,
and death.
“Mahamati, Shakra131 was versed in a wide range of
discourse and himself authored a treatise on speech. There once
was a proponent of materialism who assumed the form of a
serpent132 and entered Shakra’s palace and proposed a debate:

‘I have come to destroy Shakra’s thousand-spoked chariot. If I
lose, I will acknowledge his superiority, and he can cut off every
one of my heads.’ Once he declared his intentions, he used
Shakra’s own arguments to overwhelm him. When Shakra
acknowledged defeat, he smashed Shakra’s chariot then
returned to the human world. Thus, Mahamati, the arguments,
metaphors, and embellishments of materialists, the expressions
of which even beasts are able to employ, mislead gods and
asuras into becoming attached to views of arising and cessation
—how much more so humans. Therefore, Mahamati, you
should keep your distance from materialists because they are
able to promote the causes of suffering. Don’t associate with
them.
“Mahamati, even though materialist doctrines number in the
hundreds of thousands, Mahamati, materialists only speak about
the realm of sensory awareness. And it will only be in the final
five hundred years of later ages133 that they will create schisms
and their mistaken views of causation will flourish and be
accepted by false disciples. Mahamati, when materialists thus
create schisms using the expressions, metaphors, and
embellishments of other schools, they will do so based on their
own reasoning, not on their own understanding. Mahamati,
followers of other paths have no doctrines concerning personal
understanding. Nor do any of the countless hundreds of
thousands of other teachings expounded by materialists teach
personal understanding. Nor do they themselves realize the
foolishness of materialism.”
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, while the
various expressions, metaphors, and embellishments used by
materialists and followers of other paths do not involve personal

understanding but rather attachment to their own reasoning,
does the Bhagavan not also teach materialism in his exposition of
countless different terms to the gods, humans, and asuras who
come here from different realms, and not personal
understanding? And does he not include arguments that are
counted among the wisdom of other schools?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “I do not teach materialism. Nor
that anything comes or goes.134 I only teach what does not
come and what does not go. Mahamati, what comes refers to
what gathers and appears. What goes refers to what scatters
and disappears. What neither comes nor goes does not arise
and does not cease. The meaning of what I teach cannot be
counted among the fabrications of materialists. And how so?
Because it is not attached to an external existence that does not
exist. Dualistic fabrications cannot affect those who dwell on the
perceptions of their own mind. The external world and its forms
do not exist. Once you see they are perceptions of your own
mind, fabrications that are perceptions of your own mind do not
arise. And when fabrications do not arise, you enter the empty,
formless, effortless threefold gate of liberation,135 which is why it
is called liberation.
“Mahamati, I recall once a materialist Brahman136 came to
where I was staying and without waiting asked, ‘Gautama, is
everything created?’
“I answered, ‘Brahman, that everything is created is the most
rudimentary kind of materialism.’
“He asked again, ‘Is everything not created?’
“I answered, ‘That everything is not created is the second
kind of materialism.’
“He asked again, ‘Is everything permanent? Or is everything

impermanent? Does everything arise? Or does everything not
arise?’
“I answered, ‘That makes six kinds of materialism.’
“Mahamati, he asked again, ‘Is everything the same? Or is
everything different? Is everything both of these? Or is
everything neither of these? Or does everything appear due to
multiple causes?’
“I answered, ‘That makes eleven kinds of materialism.’
“Mahamati, he asked again, ‘Is everything neutral? Or is
everything karmic? Is there a self? Or is there no self? Does this
world exist? Or does this world not exist? Or is there another
world? Or is there no other world? Is there liberation? Or is
there no liberation? Is everything momentary? Or is everything
not momentary? And are space, cessation, and nirvana137
created, Gautama? Or are they not created? And is there an
intermediate existence?138 Or is there no intermediate
existence?’
“Mahamati, I answered, ‘Brahman, all these things of which
you speak are materialism. This materialism of yours is not what
I teach. I only teach that the cause of the three realms and their
various ills is the habit-energy of fabrications and projections
without beginning. But because you are unable to see that they
are merely perceptions of your own mind, you give rise to
projections and objectify an external existence. According to
followers of other paths, awareness arises from the threefold
combination of a self, sense organs, and sense objects, but not
according to me. Brahman, I do not teach that there are causes,
nor do I do teach that there are no causes.139 I only teach
causation as a fabrication of projecting the existence of a subject
and an object. This is not something you or others who accept

the continuity of a self can understand.’
“Mahamati, nirvana, space, and cessation are not three things.
They are only counted as three things.140
“Furthermore, Mahamati, this materialist Brahman asked me
again, ‘Are ignorance, desire, and karma the cause of the three
realms? Or are they not the cause?’
“I answered, ‘Both of these are also materialism.’
“He asked again, ‘Does everything have individual and shared
characteristics?’
“I answered, ‘This is also materialism. Brahman, any
movement of the mind involving projection of an external object
is materialism.’
“Again, Mahamati, the Brahman asked, ‘Is there any teaching
that is not materialism? I am versed in all the doctrines of other
schools and in the different expressions, arguments, metaphors,
and embellishments of their teachings.’
“I answered, ‘There is, Brahman, but it is not one of yours. It
is not a fabrication, and it is not a doctrine, and it is not a
teaching. But it is not not a teaching, and its various expressions
are not not embellished with arguments and metaphors.”
“The Brahman asked, “hat is it that is not materialism, not not
a doctrine, and not not a teaching?”
“I answered, ‘Brahman, there is something that is not
materialism, but it is something you followers of other paths
cannot understand due to your mistaken attachment to the
fabrication and projection of external existence. Projections do
not arise when you understand that existence and nonexistence
are nothing but perceptions of your own mind. And projections
do not arise when you do not grasp external objects. The
permanent cessation of projection, this is what I mean by ‘what

is not materialism.’ This is my teaching and not yours. Briefly,
Brahman, if consciousness involves coming or going, birth or
death, joy or suffering, disappearance or appearance, contact or
grasping, or if it involves attachment to a combination or a
continuity or to a desire or a cause, Brahman, if it involves
anything like this, it is your materialism and not mine.’
“Mahamati, after this materialist Brahman had asked in this
manner, and I had answered in this manner, he was silent. Then
he left without saying another word.141 But he thought about his
own understanding and said to himself, ‘This Buddhist monk is
incomprehensible. He teaches no arising, no form, no cause, and
that once someone becomes aware that what they perceive are
their own projections, projections do not arise.’
“Mahamati, you asked me earlier why I said anyone who
associated with those who engage in materialist eloquence
would embrace desires of the flesh and not the Dharma. This is
why.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, what does it mean
to embrace desires of the flesh or the Dharma?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It is excellent, excellent, indeed,
that you should think to ask about the meaning of such
expressions on behalf of beings in the future. Listen carefully,
and ponder it well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati bowed and said, “May we be so instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Desires of the flesh refer to
those that involve clutching or letting go, touching or tasting,
attachment to external sensation, addiction to dualistic views,
and rebirth once more in a suffering body along with the anxiety,
grief and affliction of birth, old age, and death. All such
tribulations arise from desire and from associating with

materialism or materialists. This is what I and other buddhas
refer to as ‘desires of the flesh.’ This is what is meant by
embracing desires of the flesh and not embracing the Dharma.
“And to what, Mahamati, does embracing the Dharma refer?
This means understanding what are nothing but perceptions of
one’s own mind, seeing that beings have no self and that
dharmas have no self, not giving rise to projections, becoming
versed in the higher stages, transcending the mind, the will, and
conceptual consciousness, having one’s forehead anointed with
wisdom by all the buddhas, embracing and fulfilling the ten
inexhaustible vows,142 and gaining effortless mastery of all
teachings. This is what is meant by the Dharma. It means not
falling prey to any view, any fabrication, any projection, any
existence or duality.
“Mahamati, foolish people and most followers of other paths
fall prey to such dualities as permanence and annihilation, but not
the wise. Those who accept the doctrine of no causation give
rise to views of permanence, while those who accept the
destruction of external causes and the nonexistence of conditions
give rise to views of annihilation. Mahamati, not seeing anything
originate or persist or cease is what I mean by the Dharma.
Mahamati, you and the other bodhisattvas should reflect on
what is meant by desires of the flesh and the Dharma.”
1. “The different kinds of materialism / the false
teachings of other paths / projections of cause and effect /
include no personal attainment
2. Only this personal attainment of mine / transcends
cause and effect / thus I tell disciples / avoid materialist

views
3. What is only mind cannot be seen / nor is a divided
mind perceived / when grasper and grasped do not exist /
the eternal and momentary are both transcended
4. The slightest movement of the mind / this is what
materialism is / unmoved by projections / are those who
see their own mind
5. ‘It comes’ means something appears / ‘it goes’
means something disappears / those who know what
comes and goes / stop giving rise to projections
6. Permanence or impermanence / effects or no
effects / this world or another world / these comprise the
materialist way.”

LXXIVIV144
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, when
you speak of nirvana, what do you mean by nirvana, as
followers of other paths also imagine something?’”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder it
well, and I will explain this to you.
“Followers of other paths do, indeed, imagine something as
nirvana. But what they imagine does not accord with nirvana.”
Mahamati said, “May we be so instructed, Bhagavan.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “For followers of some paths it
is the cessation of the skandhas, the dhatus, and the ayatanas, or
the absence of worldly desires, or the impermanence of
everything they see, or the non-arising of any and all mental
activity, or not thinking about past, future, or present states, or
putting an end to all sensation, like the extinguishing of a lamp or
a fire or the destruction of a seed, or not giving rise to
projections. These are among their conceptions of nirvana. But
nirvana, Mahamati, is not the destruction of anything.145
“Mahamati, some think liberation is going from one place to
another place, a place where thoughts of an external world
cease, like when the wind stops. Some think eliminating the view
of the knower and the known is liberation. Some see146
permanence and impermanence as liberation. Some see the

different forms they perceive as the cause that gives rise to
suffering, and they envision them ending. Unaware that these are
nothing but perceptions of their own mind, they become afraid
of forms and develop a deep desire to see no form, which they
think of as nirvana.
“Some think nirvana is knowing what is indestructible among
the individual or shared characteristics of internal or external
dharmas of the past, the present, or the future. Some think of
nirvana as the destruction147 of everything, including one’s self,
person, being, and life. Relying on the immature wisdom of
followers of other paths, some see a primordial nature and a
cosmic being,148 and between the two the cosmic being
producing an underlying nature, which is likened to a kind of
primordial force, which then transforms into tendencies, and the
tendencies then acting as the creator, which they view as
nirvana.149 Some say it is the end of good and bad karma, some
say it is the end of affliction, and some say it is wisdom. 150
Some see a supreme power151 actually responsible for birth and
death as nirvana. And some say there is no other cause of birth
and death than giving birth to one another, and, due to their
ignorance, they think this is nirvana. That this very attachment is
the cause is lost on these ignorant beings.
“Followers of still other paths say finding what leads to truth is
nirvana. Some see tendencies152 and the sameness of the
combinations that tendencies give rise to or their difference or
both of these or neither and think this is nirvana. And some see
what nature gives rise to as nirvana, things such as the patterns in
a peacock feather or a gemstone or the sharpness of a thorn.
“Mahamati, some think nirvana is understanding the twenty-

five realities153 or upholding the six virtues that protect king and
kingdom.154 Some see time as the creator and the seasons as
the world and knowing this as nirvana. Some say it is something
that exists, some say it is something that does not exist, and
some say it is knowing what exists and what does not exist. And
some imagine nirvana as seeing the difference between nirvana
and whatever one is aware of.155
“All these different fantasies advanced by followers of other
paths fail to establish what they aim to establish and are rejected
by the wise. Mahamati, all these conceptions of nirvana suffer
from duality, and none of these conceptions of nirvana of other
paths includes anything that arises or ceases. Mahamati, each of
these nirvanas of other paths has its own doctrine, but none of
them are based on the examination of wisdom. Such
conceptions unsettle and disturb the mind, and none of them
results in nirvana.
“According to what I teach, Mahamati, nirvana means fully
understanding that it is nothing but the perception of one’s own
mind and is not something that exists externally and that it
transcends the four possibilities. It is seeing what is real without
falling prey to dualistic projections that are perceptions of one’s
own mind and that are devoid of perceiver or perceived. It is
not accepting the validity of any rule or measure or following
anyone ignorant of reality. Rather, it is letting everything go in
favor of attaining the personal realization of buddha knowledge
whereby one knows the two kinds of no-self, avoids the two
afflictions, removes the two obstructions, gets free of the two
kinds of death,156 advances to the higher stages and the
profound Samadhi of the Illusory of the tathagata stage, and
transcends the mind, the will, and conceptual consciousness.

What I call nirvana, Mahamati, is what you and the other
bodhisattvas should cultivate. And you should distance
yourselves at once from the views of nirvana held by followers
of other paths.”
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “When followers of other paths view nirvana / they
all give rise to fantasies / but the products of imagination /
are not the means to liberation
2. Blind to bondage and the one who binds / no
skillful means in sight / such people imagine liberation / but
a liberation that never arrives
3. The different means to knowledge / the
philosophies of other schools / all are foolish fantasies /
none leads to liberation
4. All these fools of other paths / misperceive cause
and effect / preach existence and nonexistence / from
which there is no liberation
5. Fools delight in fantasies / not in hearing about the
truth / words produce three kinds of pain157 / which only
truth can eradicate
6. Like an image in a mirror / appears but isn’t there /
in the mirror of projection / fools all see their double
7. Who doesn’t know the mind or conditions / gives
rise to projections of duality / once they know the mind
and the world158 / projections no longer arise
8. The mind is a multiplicity / devoid of seeing or what
is seen / objects appear and disappear / or so fools
imagine
9. The three realms as projections / external objects

as not existing / perceptions as fabrications / fools can’t
comprehend
10. All sutras speak of projection / but never get free
of words / because apart from language / there is nothing
of which to speak.”

LXXV159
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please tell us
about complete enlightenment so that by better understanding
the essential nature of a tathagata, I and the other bodhisattvas
might enlighten ourselves and also enlighten others.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Ask whatever you want, and I
will answer accordingly.”
Mahamati said, “Bhagavan, are the tathagatas, the arhats, the
fully enlightened ones created or not created, the result or the
cause, what sees or what is seen, what teaches or what is
taught, what knows or what is known? Or are they different or
not different from such terms as these?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “In regard to such terms as
these, the tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones are
neither the result nor the cause. And why not? Because both
would be wrong. Mahamati, if tathagatas were the result, they
would be created and would be impermanent. And if they were
impermanent, then every result would be a tathagata, which is
something neither I nor any other buddha would want.160 But if
they were not created, they would not attain anything, and their
cultivation would be empty, like a rabbit’s horns or a barren
woman’s child, because it would not exist.
“Mahamati, if they are not the result and not the cause, then

they neither exist nor do not exist. And if they neither exist nor
do not exist, then they are beyond the four possibilities. The four
possibilities refer to the mundane world. If they are beyond the
four possibilities, then they are not subject to the four
possibilities. And it is because they are not subject to the four
possibilities that they are perceived by the wise. This is how the
meaning of all expressions about a tathagata should be
understood by the wise.
“As I have said, there is no self in anything, by which you
should understand that by no self what I mean is the
nonexistence of a self. Everything exists as itself and does not
exist as another, like a cow or a horse. For example, Mahamati,
a cow does not exist as a horse. And a horse does not exist as a
cow. In reality, they neither exist nor do not exist, but they do
not not exist as themselves. Thus, Mahamati, there is nothing
that does not have its own characteristics or that does have its
own characteristics. But that they have no self is something
foolish people cannot understand due to their projections. Thus,
the emptiness, the non-arising, and the absence of the self-
existence of things are to be understood like this.
“In the same manner, tathagatas are neither different from the
skandhas, nor are they not different.161 If they were not different
from the skandhas, they would be impermanent. And if they
were different, then their practice would be useless. Now two of
anything are necessarily different. For example, a bull’s horns
are alike. Thus, they aren’t different. But because their
dimensions vary, they are different. This is true of everything.
Mahamati, if a bull’s right horn is different from its left horn, then
the left horn is different from its right horn. Thus, in terms of
dimensions, every form is different. But tathagatas, Mahamati,

are neither dif ferent nor not different from the skandhas, the
dhatus, or the ayatanas.
“In the same manner, tathagatas and liberation are neither
different nor not different. Thus tathagatas are said to be
liberated. If tathagatas were different from liberation, they would
be composed of material characteristics. And if they were
composed of material characteristics, they would be
impermanent. However, if they were not different, there would
be no distinctions among the attainments of practitioners. But
distinctions are seen among practitioners. Hence, they are
neither different, nor are they not different.
“In the same manner, what knows and what is known are
neither different nor not different. Mahamati, if what knows and
what is known are neither dif ferent nor not different,162 then
they are neither permanent nor not permanent, neither cause nor
effect, neither created nor not created, neither perceiving nor
perceived, neither characterizing nor characterized, neither the
skandhas nor different from the skandhas, neither what speaks
nor what is spoken, neither the same nor different nor both nor
neither. And because they are neither the same nor different nor
both nor neither, they are beyond all measure. What is beyond
all measure is inexpressible. And what is inexpressible does not
arise. And what does not arise does not cease. And what does
not cease is completely still. And what is completely still is
essentially nirvana.163 And what is essentially nirvana is neither a
result nor a cause. And what is neither a result nor a cause has
no objective support. And what has no objective support is
beyond the reach of all fabrications. And what is beyond the
reach of all fabrications is a tathagata. A tathagata is complete
enlightenment. Mahamati, this is what is meant by the complete

enlightenment of a buddha. The complete enlightenment of a
buddha, Mahamati, is beyond the reach of the senses.”
1. “Beyond the reach of the senses / neither a result
nor a cause / beyond what perceives and what is perceived
/ beyond what sees and what is seen 164
2. The skandhas, the nidanas, and enlightenment165 /
don’t view them as the same or different / if there is nothing
to see / how can anything be distinguished
3. It isn’t created or not created / it isn’t a result or a
cause / it isn’t the skandhas or inside the skandhas166 / nor
is it anywhere else
4. Nor is it something that exists / something someone
imagines / nor does it not exist / it is just like everything else
5. Because it exists it doesn’t / because it doesn’t it
does / its nonexistence cannot be grasped / nor can its
existence be imagined
6. Confused about self and no self / mired in nothing
but words / those who drown in dualities / harm themselves
and the world
7. Who gets free from all errors / truly sees my way /
this is called seeing truly / not slandering the guide.”

LXXVI167
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan,
according to the Bhagavan, the sutras are concerned with what
neither arises nor ceases. The Bhagavan has also said ‘what
neither arises nor ceases’168 is another name for tathagatas.
Bhagavan, is it because of their nonexistence that he says they
neither arise nor cease? Or is it because it is another name for
tathagatas?”169
The Buddha replied, “I say nothing arises or ceases because
the categories of existence and nonexistence do not apply.”170
Mahamati replied, “Bhagavan, if nothing arises, then there is
nothing for us to grasp. But if nothing arises, is there not
something in the name? Could you please explain this?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Excellent. Excellent, indeed.
Listen carefully and ponder this well, and I will explain and
clarify this for you.”
Mahamati replied, “May we be so instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “I teach that ‘tathagata’ does not
not exist but also that nothing can be grasped in what neither
arises nor ceases. Also, it neither arises nor ceases because it is
not dependent on conditions. And yet, neither is it without
meaning. What I teach, Mahamati, is that this is the name for a
tathagata’s projection body.171 What does not arise is beyond

the understanding of followers of other paths, shravakas,
pratyeka-buddhas, or bodhisattvas of the first seven stages.
Mahamati, ‘what does not arise’ is another name for a tathagata.
“Mahamati, it is like with ‘Indra,’ ‘Shakra,’ and
‘Purandara.’172 Every such entity has multiple names. But
because they have multiple names does not mean they have
multiple existences or that they don’t have their own existence.
In the same manner, Mahamati, I have had countless hundreds
of thousands of names in this karmic world. But when foolish
people hear someone speak my names, they do not know they
are different names of the Tathagata.
“Mahamati, some beings know me as Tathagata, others know
me as Sar-vajna the All Knowing, or as Buddha the
Enlightened, or as Natha the Refuge, or as Svayambhu the Self-
Aware, or as Nayaka the Teacher, or as Vinayaka the
Philosopher, or as Parinayaka the Guide, or as Rishi the Ascetic,
or as Brahma, or as Vishnu, or as Ishvara, or as Pradhana the
Victor, or as Kapila, or as Bhutanta the Real, or as Soma the
Moon, or as Surya the Sun, or as Rama the King, or as
Anutpada the Non-Arising, or as Anirodha the Unceasing, or as
Sunyata the Empty, or as Thatata the Thus, or as Satya the
Truth, or as Bhutatathata the Reality, or as Dharmata the True
Nature, or as Nirvana, or as Nitya the Eternal, or as Samata the
Impartial, or as Advaya the Non-Dual, or as Nirabhasa the
Imageless, or as Mukti the Liberated, or as Yana the Path, or as
Manomaya the Projection.
“Mahamati, like the moon in the water,173 which is neither in
nor not in the water, I have been known in this and other worlds
by neither more nor less than countless hundreds of thousands of
names such as these. The ignorant, however, fall prey to dualities

and are thus incapable of knowing me. Though they might revere
and honor me, they do not understand the meaning of terms or
know how to distinguish names and do not understand the way
of personal understanding but cling instead to various texts and
explanations. They imagine ‘what neither arises nor ceases’ is
something that does not exist and do not realize it is another
name for a tathagata, as with ‘Indra,’ ‘Shakra,’ and ‘Purandara.’
Because they do not understand where the way of personal
understanding eventually leads, they become attached instead to
whatever is said about things.
“Mahamati, such fools say things like this, ‘The meaning is
like the words. Words and meaning are not separate. And how
so? Because meaning has no substance. There is no meaning
outside of words but only what resides in words.’
“Mahamati, those in possession of such immature wisdom do
not understand the essential nature of words. They do not
understand that words arise and cease, while meaning does not
arise or cease. Mahamati, all words are dependent on language.
Meaning is not because it transcends existence and
nonexistence. It is not subject to arising, and it has no substance.
Mahamati, the tathagatas do not teach teachings dependent on
language because what exists or does not exist cannot be found
in language, but only by those who do not depend on language.
“Mahamati, if someone says what is taught by a tathagata is
dependent on language, they speak falsely. The Dharma
transcends language. Therefore, Mahamati, neither I nor any
other buddha or bodhisattva speaks a single word or responds
with a single word. And why not? Because the Dharma
transcends language. It is not that we teach a meaningless
meaning but that words are the projections of beings.174 Still,

Mahamati, if we did not say anything, our teaching would come
to an end. And if our teaching came to an end, there would be
no buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka-buddhas, or shravakas.
And if there were none, who would teach and who would listen?
“Therefore, Mahamati, bodhisattvas are not attached to
words but expound the teaching of the sutras according to what
is appropriate. Because the longings and afflictions of beings are
not the same, I and other buddhas teach different teachings to
beings with different levels of understanding so that they will get
free of the mind, the will, and conceptual consciousness, not so
that they will attain the personal realization of buddha
knowledge.175 Mahamati, to understand that nothing exists
except as a perception of one’s own mind and to transcend
dualistic projections, bodhisattvas rely on meaning and not on
language.
“If a noble son or daughter relies on language, they will not
only harm their own understanding of ultimate truth, they will not
be able to awaken others. As long as they rely on their
attachment to mistaken views, they might teach others but
without understanding the characteristics or stages of the
different teachings and without understanding their expressions.
But once they understand the characteristics and stages of the
different teachings and understand their expressions and become
fully versed in their essential meaning, they will be able to use the
bliss of true freedom from projections and their own delight
therein to establish beings everywhere in the Mahayana.
“Mahamati, those who embrace the Mahayana embrace
buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka-buddhas, and shravakas.
Those who embrace buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka-buddhas,
and shravakas, embrace all beings. Those who embrace all

beings embrace the Dharma. Those who embrace the Dharma,
do not bring an end to the lineage of buddhas. Those who do
not bring an end to the lineage of buddhas know how to enter
the most exalted of abodes. And knowing how to enter the most
exalted of abodes, bodhisattvas are able to constantly teach
others and establish them in the Mahayana. By their mastery of
the ten powers,176 they manifest different guises based on their
understanding of the characteristics of the physical types,
aspirations, and afflictions of other beings, and they teach them
what is truly so. What is truly so does not vary. What is truly so
does not come or go. What puts an end to all fabrications, this is
what is truly so. Mahamati, a noble son or daughter should not
embrace or cling to anything that is said because what is real is
beyond language.
“Mahamati, if one person177 points to something with their
finger, and a foolish person looks at their finger, they won’t
know what they really mean. In the same manner, foolish people
become attached to the finger of words. And because they
never look away from it, they are never able to discover the true
meaning beyond the finger of words. Likewise, Mahamati, an
infant should eat cooked rice, not uncooked rice. If someone
feeds it uncooked rice, that person must either be mad or not
know how to prepare rice.178 Mahamati, the same is true of
‘what neither arises nor ceases.’ Those who don’t make an
effort don’t become skilled. Thus, you should focus your efforts
on becoming skilled and not on words, as if you were looking at
someone’s fingertip.
“Thus, Mahamati, you should focus your efforts on the true
meaning.179 The true meaning is subtle and silent. It is the cause
of nirvana. Words are linked to projections, and projections are

tied to birth and death. Mahamati, the true meaning is learned
from the learned. Mahamati, those who are learned esteem
meaning and not words. Those who esteem meaning don’t
accept the scriptures and doctrines of other schools. They don’t
accept them for themselves, nor do they cause others to accept
them. Thus they are called ‘learned and virtuous.’ Hence, those
who seek meaning should approach those who are learned,
those who esteem meaning. And they should distance
themselves from those who do the opposite and who attach
themselves to words.”

LXXVII180
Once again by means of the Buddha’s spiritual power,181
Mahamati Bodhisattva asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, your
proclamation of ‘what neither arises nor ceases’ is not unique.
And why not? Because there are other schools whose causes182
neither arise nor cease. Also, the Bhagavan teaches that the
realms of space, nonanalytic cessation183 and nirvana neither
arise nor cease.
“Bhagavan, other schools teach that every world arises from
causes, while the Bhagavan teaches that every world arises from
the conditions of ignorance, desire, karma, and projection. But
the causes of the one and the conditions of the other are merely
different words.
“The same is true for the causes and conditions of external
objects, for which there is no difference between the
explanations of the Bhagavan and those of other schools.
Instead of their nine things184 that neither arise nor cease, such
as elementary particles, a first cause, a paramount power, or a
creator, the Bhagavan also teaches that whatever exists neither
arises nor ceases because its existence or nonexistence cannot
be determined.
“Other schools also teach that the four elements are
indestructible, that their essential nature neither arises nor

ceases, that they are eternal, and that the four elements extend
everywhere without losing their essential nature. What the
Bhagavan teaches is also like this, which is why I said it was not
unique. I hope the Bhagavan can explain how it differs, how it is
unique, and how it excels that of other schools. But if there isn’t
any difference, then the teachers of other schools must also be
buddhas based on their teaching of ‘what neither arises nor
ceases.’ The Bhagavan has said it is impossible for multiple
buddhas to appear in the world at the same time. But according
to the foregoing, if there isn’t any difference, there would be
multiple buddhas at the same time.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “My teaching of what neither
arises nor ceases is not the same as the teaching of what neither
arises nor ceases taught by members of other schools. And how
so? According to these members of other schools, there is
something that exists that has the characteristics of neither arising
nor changing. 185 Mine does not fall prey to such categories as
existence or nonexistence. Mahamati, mine transcends the
categories of existence and nonexistence. It is not subject to
arising or ceasing. Neither does it exist, nor does it not exist.
“It does not not exist because it appears just as an illusion or
a dream does. But then how does it not exist? Because form
lacks any perceptible characteristics of self-existence, it appears
but does not appear. It is perceived but is not perceived.
Therefore whatever exists neither exists nor does not exist.
Once you realize it is nothing but the perception of your own
mind, its projections do not arise, you dwell in peace and
happiness, and worldly concerns cease.
“What ignorant and foolish people do is give rise to
projections, but not the wise. Projections are not real, like cities

of gandharvas or their conjured residents. Mahamati, foolish
people imagine their conjured residents, such as merchants and
shopkeepers, entering and leaving those gandharvan cities and
that they really enter and leave, when, in fact, no one enters or
leaves. It is merely due to their projections.
“Likewise, Mahamati, the confusion foolish people give rise
to about what neither arises nor ceases is neither created nor not
created. It is like the appearance of conjured beings. In truth,
nothing arises or ceases. There is no existence or nonexistence.
This is true of all things. They neither arise nor cease. Foolish
people fall prey to falsehood and give rise to projections of
arising and ceasing, but not the wise.
“What is false is not so, and it is no different with the
projection of self existence. Though projections seem to be
different,186 they are attachments to the self-existence of things
due to not seeing clearly.187 Those who do not see clearly never
get free of projections.
“Therefore, Mahamati, seeing what has no form is better than
not seeing what has form. Seeing what has form is the cause of
rebirth. Hence, it isn’t better. Mahamati, where there is no form,
projections do not arise. What neither arises nor ceases is what
I call nirvana. Mahamati, nirvana is to see the meaning of what is
truly so and to get free from the net of thoughts of previous
projections. To attain the personal realization of the noble
knowledge of a tathagata, this is what I call nirvana.”

LXXVIII188
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “To refute the doctrine of arising / to establish the
truth of non-arising / I explain this teaching189 / fools can’t
understand
2. Although things don’t arise / they don’t exist as
nothing190 / as gandharvan cities, illusions, or dreams / they
exist but without a cause
3. Why don’t things arise or exist by themselves /
why are they empty / because apart from combinations /
nothing appears to wisdom / thus I teach what is empty /
what doesn’t arise and is not self-existent191
4. When this and that combine / something appears
but doesn’t exist / analysis finds no combination / despite
what other schools claim
5. As dreams, illusions, or strands of hair / mirages or
gandharvan cities / such are the things of the world / they
appear but without a cause
6. To refute doctrines of causation / I proclaim the
truth of non-arising / because I proclaim non-arising / the
Dharma continues unbroken / but the radiance of no
causation / frightens the followers of other paths.”192
Mahamati then asked in verse:

7. “How and caused by what / and why do things
arise / and how do they come together / according to this
doctrine of no causation?”
The Bhagavan then replied in verse:
8. “When created things are examined / as neither
having nor not having a cause / the doctrine of arising and
cessation / is undone by what one sees.”
Mahamati then asked in verse:
9. “Does non-arising mean nonexistence / or does it
wait upon a cause / a name should not mean nothing /
could you please explain?”193
The Bhagavan then replied in verse:
10. “Non-arising isn’t due to nonexistence / nor does
it wait upon a cause / nor does a name mean something
exists / nor does a name have no meaning
11. Beyond the reach of other paths / pratyeka-
buddhas and shravakas / beyond the seven stages / this is
the realm of non-arising194
12. Beyond causes and conditions / likewise beyond
all actions / resting on nothing but mind / this I say is non-
arising195
13. Things not arising from causes / neither existing
nor not existing / beyond perceiver and perceived / this I
say is non-arising196
14.1he mind without an object / beyond the two
modes of reality197 / transforming one’s very ground198 /
this I say is non-arising
15. No external existence or nonexistence / no
grasping by the mind / putting an end to every view / this I
say is non-arising

16. When something is thus distinguished / as empty
and without self-existence / it isn’t empty because it’s
empty / it’s empty because it doesn’t arise
17. When causes and conditions combine/ something
arises and something ceases / aside from causes and
conditions / nothing else arises or ceases
18. Aside from causes and conditions / there isn’t
something else that exists / something the same or different
/ despite what other schools say
19. Existence or nonexistence doesn’t arise / there is
no existence or nonexistence / except when combinations
change / neither of these apply199
20. It is only according to convention / mutual
dependence becomes a chain / apart from the chain of
causation / arising has no meaning
21. Arising doesn’t arise if it doesn’t exist / the error
of other paths is thus avoided / I only speak of a chain of
causation / when fools can’t understand
22. As for something else arising / apart from the
chain of causation / this is the doctrine of no causation /
which denies the meaning of the chain
23. Just as a lamp illuminates forms / perception of
the chain does the same / thus apart from the chain /
something else would exist200
24. What doesn’t arise doesn’t exist / its existence is
like that of space / apart from the chain of causation / the
wise find nothing to see201
25. But there is something that doesn’t arise /
something attained by the wise / the arising of which
doesn’t arise / the forbearance of non-arising202

26. If in every world / whatever you see is a chain /
everything as a chain / from this you will attain samadhi203
27. Ignorance, desire, and karma / these are the
interior chain / a bow drill, a lump of clay, a wheel / and
seeds make up the outsides 204
28. If something else existed / something arising from
causes / this would negate the chain’s meaning / and thus it
wouldn’t succeed205
29. If something arose that didn’t exist / which link
would be its cause / things give rise to each other / this is
what causation means
30. Solidity, moisture, heat, and movement206 / these
are the projections of fools / nothing else exists but their
combinations / thus I teach no self-existence
31. Like doctors who treat diseases / don’t have
particular doctrines / because diseases differ / they
prescribe different cures
32. For the sake of other beings / to rid them of
afflictions / I gauge their level of understanding / before I
decide what to teach
33. But different afflictions and understandings / don’t
mean different teachings / I only teach one path / the path
of the Mahayana. ”207

LXXIX208
Mahamati Bodhisattva once more asked the Buddha,
“Followers of other paths all give rise to projections of
impermanence. The Bhagavan also teaches that all phenomena
are impermanent, that they arise and they cease. What does this
mean? Is this wrong? Or is this right? And how many kinds of
impermanence are there?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Followers of other paths have
seven kinds209 of impermanence, none of which are taught by
me. And what are the seven? Some say impermanence is when
something is created and then abandoned.210 Some say
impermanence is the destruction of shape. Some say
impermanence is form.211
Some say impermanence is the process during which form
changes and that because it involves an uninterrupted
dissolution, like the transformation of milk to curds, the process
of change is imperceptible but that impermanence destroys
whatever is there. Some say impermanence is something that
exists. Some say impermanence is something that exists and
does not exist. And some say impermanence is something that
does not arise but is inherent in all phenomena.212
“Mahamati, according to impermanence as something that

exists and does not exist, the individual characteristics of the four
elements and what they comprise are destroyed, but the self-
existence of the four elements is imperceptible and does not
arise.
“According to impermanence as something that does not
arise, neither the existence nor nonexistence of anything arises,
and even the most careful analysis yields nothing, neither
permanence nor impermanence. This is the meaning of what
does not arise, not of what does arise. This is what characterizes
impermanence as something that does not arise. Those who
don’t understand this fall prey to the view of followers of other
paths that impermanence is something that arises.
“Mahamati, as for impermanence being something that exists,
this is a projection of one’s own mind and not of the existence of
permanence or impermanence. What does this mean? It means
that the existence of impermanence itself is not destroyed.
Mahamati, the nonexistence of what exists is the result of
impermanence. Except for impermanence, there is nothing that
can cause what exists not to exist. It is like a club or a roof
tile213 or a rock. It breaks things.
“Clearly it is no different for anything else. For in terms of
existence and impermanence, there is no difference between
cause and effect. If this is impermanence, and this is the effect,
and there is no difference between cause and effect, then
everything that exists would be permanent, as nothing would
exist as a cause. Mahamati, the nonexistence of what exists does
have a cause, but not one fools are aware of. A cause does not
produce an unrelated effect. If it did, anything that exists could
be impermanence. And if the effect were unrelated, there would
be no difference between cause and effect, even though they

were clearly different.
“In the case of impermanence as something that exists, this
would amount to the existence of an effect-producing cause. But
if that were so, whatever exists would never end. If everything
that exists amounted to an effect-producing cause, then
impermanence itself would be impermanent. And because
impermanence would be impermanent, everything that exists
would not be impermanent but permanent.
“As for impermanence being inherent in whatever exists, this
is contradicted by the three periods of time. Either it is
destroyed along with past forms, or it does not arise in the future
because such forms do not arise, or it is destroyed along with
present forms. Forms are different combinations of the four
elements, and the essential nature of the four elements and what
they comprise is not subject to destruction, as it neither varies
nor does it not vary. But while according to followers of other
paths, the four elements are indestructible, it is common
knowledge that the four elements and all the forms they
comprise throughout the three realms arise and cease to exist.
Where then do the followers of such paths conceive of
impermanence as existing apart from the four elements and what
they comprise if the four elements do not arise and their essential
nature is not subject to destruction?
“As for impermanence existing apart from initial creation,
there are no other four elements than the four elements because
among
the
individual
characteristics
of
their
different
characteristics, no differences can be found. Since they don’t dif
fer, they don’t create something that does. This kind of
impermanence, you should know, involves the non-arising of
dualities.

“As for impermanence being the destruction of shape, this
means that the four elements and what they comprise are not
destroyed. They are never destroyed. Mahamati, if one analyzes
objects into the finest particles, one observes their destruction,
as the shapes of the four elements and what they comprise
cannot avoid appearing to differ in terms of their dimensions. But
this is not true of the four elements. The four elements are not
destroyed. It is the shapes that appear to be destroyed. This
falls under the doctrine of the Samkhyas.214
“As for impermanence consisting in form, this means form
itself is impermanence. But what is impermanent are shapes, not
the four elements. If the four elements were impermanent, this
would deny worldly convention. The denial of worldly
convention falls under the doctrines of the Lokayatas,215 who
view whatever exists as nothing but words and individual
characteristics as not arising.
“As for impermanence consisting in change,216 this means that
the existence of form appears to differ, not the four elements.
For example, when we use gold to make ornaments, its
appearance changes, but the nature of gold is not destroyed. It
is only the ornaments that are subject to destruction. Thus,
changes in whatever else exists are also like this.
“Such are the various views of impermanence held by
followers of other paths who imagine that when fire destroys the
four elements,217 their individual characteristics are not
destroyed. If their individual characteristics were destroyed, the
four elements and what they comprise would cease to exist.
“Mahamati, my teaching is that what arises is neither
permanent nor impermanent. And how so? Because external
existence cannot be determined, I teach that the three realms are

nothing but mind and do not teach the arising or ceasing of their
different characteristics. As for the four elements coming
together and differentiating, the four elements and what they
comprise are projections of the duality of subject and object. By
understanding that dualistic views are projections, one gets free
from the dualistic views of external existence and nonexistence,
and one sees them as nothing but perceptions of one’s own
mind.
“Projections arise when you think about doing something, not
when you do nothing. Avoid projections of the existence or
nonexistence of the mind. All mundane, metaphysical, and
transcendent dharmas are neither permanent nor impermanent.
Those who fail to perceive them as merely perceptions of their
own mind end up attached to erroneous, dualistic views. But
because followers of other paths do not perceive them as their
own projections, such fools have no means by which to know
that all mundane, metaphysical, and transcendent dharmas are
the result of their own projection of words. This is not something
fools are aware of.”
The Bhagavan then repeated the meaning of this in verse:
1. “Something separate from what is created /
differences of shape / impermanence of form or existence /
these are what other schools see218
2. In the indestructibility of what exists / the
persistence of the elements / other schools see
impermanence / immersed in a myriad views
3. For all such schools as these / there is no arising or
cessation / but if the elements last forever / what does
impermanence mean?

4. Everything is nothing but mind / from this dualities
flow / among the grasping and the grasped / there is no self
or its possessions
5. From Brahma’s heaven to the roots of trees /
throughout their world-encircling branches / what I teach is
this / it is all nothing but mind.”219
1 Chapter Three. We hear more about what distinguishes
buddhahood and the path leading thereto, with the Buddha
taking the lead and Mahamati continuing to ask questions.
2 Section LVII. The Buddha doesn’t wait for a question but
explains one of the fruits of the bodhisattva path: the
transformation of the body. Earlier, in sections XXX and LII he
linked attainment of a projection body to the eighth stage of the
path. Here, he identifies three kinds of such bodies, one attained
prior to the eighth stage that realizes the nature of mind, one
attained at the eighth stage that realizes the nature of dharmas,
and one that realizes the nature of realization and is not
associated with any stage—although it could be linked with any
or all of the final three stages.
3 The ocean here represents the eighth, or repository,
consciousness, while the waves represent the other seven forms
of consciousness.
4 While emptiness is often listed as the essential nature of all
dharmas, in the foregoing sections emphasis is placed on non-
arising and illusoriness. This is the Lankavatara’s solution to
spiritual cultivation in light of the absence of a self.
5 In these two verses, the Buddha keeps a foot on either side of
the path: self-realization and the liberation of others.
6 Section LVIII. Besides transformation of body, another fruit of
the path is transformation of deed. Here the Buddha reinterprets

harmful acts committed against our greatest benefactors and
redirects them toward our greatest enemies. As Pogo Possum
once said, “We have met the enemy, and he is us.”
7 As listed throughout the Buddhist Canon, these are the deeds
that guarantee rebirth in Avici Hell and that prevent a person
from attaining enlightenment in this life.
8 The Sanskrit avici means “uninterrupted” or “unrelenting.”
This is not only the hell in which there is no respite from
suffering, it is also the hottest of all hells.
9 Gunabhadra alone has people committing the five avici deeds
and not falling into Avici Hell. All other translators and the
Sanskrit have the expected: “Those who commit the five avici
deeds fall into Avici Hell.” The Buddha’s explanation, however,
clearly supports Gunabhadra.
10 Thirst and ignorance are the cause of our appearance on the
wheel of life and death. Hence, they are likened to our parents.
11 Our passions lie in hiding until conditions encourage their
appearance, which is why they are likened to disease-carrying
rodents.
12 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit have “eight
forms of consciousness.” But this must be a mistake, as the
teaching of the Lankavatara involves putting an end to the first
seven forms of consciousness and in transforming, not
destroying, the eighth form of consciousness into buddha
knowledge. Here, the seven forms of consciousness embody the
buddha one imagines becoming as the result of cultivation.
13 Emptiness, formlessness, and intentionlessness are the three
gates of liberation. Our false awareness cannot be killed with
kindness. Hence, practitioners show it no mercy.
14 There is a play on words here (and also in the second of the

two verses in this section), as avici means “unrelenting.”
Apparently the Sanskrit text changed. Bodhiruchi has “this is
called realizing the true dharma,” and Shikshananda has “they
are able to realize the true dharma.” Suzuki has “there is . . .
realization as regards the Dharma.” As elsewhere, I’ve followed
Gunabhadra.
15 The idea here is that showing people how reprehensible such
deeds are by projecting their appearance, they will not commit
them. Here, we see the projection bodies of the previous section
in action.
16 Namely, Avici Hell.
17 Section LIX. Implicit in this definition of buddhahood is a
reinterpretation of the Four Noble Truths: how can there be
suffering if there is no self; how can there be a cause of suffering
if there is no obstruction; how can there be a cessation of
suffering if there is no death; and how can there be a path
leading to the cessation of suffering if there is no affliction.
18 The two obstructions are passion and knowledge. Passion is
the cause of karmic death. Knowledge is the cause of
transformation death.
19 The two kinds of death are karmic death and transformation
death, the latter of which is so subtle it is barely noticed.
20 The two afflictions are the senses and what the senses give
rise to. It is on the basis of these that attachment to the two
kinds of self exist and that the two kinds of obstructions appear
and that the two kinds of death occur.
21 In Section LVI, the Buddha says this about the one path: “By
the one path I mean the one path to realization. And what does
the one path to realization mean? Projections of subject or
object do not arise in suchness. This is what the one path to

realization means.” Realization changes everything. It changes
who or what we are. Thus, shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas
also travel the one path because there are no shravakas or
pratyeka-buddhas.
22 Section LX. If a buddha’s awareness is based on no self,
Mahamati wonders why the Buddha seems to talk in terms of a
self, especially a self not limited by space or time. The Buddha
sidesteps the issue of personal identity and points Mahamati
instead to the nature of buddhahood, about which he just asked.
As the Buddha notes in the second verse of the next section,
buddhas are buddhas because they are buddhas and not other
than buddhas.
23 Once when the Buddha was walking with Ananda, he came
upon a stupa and bowed down to pay his respects. When
Ananda asked whose stupa this was, the Buddha replied, “This
is the stupa of all past buddhas.” Ananda then asked, “And
whose disciples were they?” The Buddha replied, “My
disciples.” (Quoted by Tseng Feng-yi, pg. 468)
24 The present Buddhist Canon contains hundreds of tales
about Shakyamuni’s former lives in which he does not always
appear as a human.
25 This is the name of the first king of Shakyamuni’s clan.
26 Chief of the gods, also known as Indra.
27 The appearance of Sunetra here is not accidental. The
Buddha’s statement that he was previously the sage, Sunetra,
was used in several early texts, including Vasubandhu’s
Atmavadapratisedha, as an example about which the existence
or nonexistence of a permanent self was argued.
28 These are the names of the first three buddhas of the present
kalpa, Shakyamuni being the fourth. They are mentioned earlier

in Mahamati’s questions in Section II, verse 48.
29 In his explanations of these four, Gunabhadra inverts the
order of the last two. The Sanskrit for these four is akshara,
vak, dharma, and kaya.
30 The Sanskrit for syllable is akshara, which means
“imperishable,” as syllables were thought to be the “atoms” of
speech.
31 The Buddha’s voice was said to include eight tones, each of
which possessed eight qualities. Thus, his voice was
characterized by sixty-four transcendent sounds.
32 A bird whose melodious voice is rarely, if ever, heard by
humans, as it dwells beyond the red dust of the mundane world.
33 Such bodies include those of humans but also those of
elephants or parrots. The Buddha’s mention of such bodies here
is in response to the second part of Mahamati’s question. While
their bodies might differ in outward appearance, the marks and
attributes that distinguish them as buddhas do not.
34 These thirty-seven elements are often linked together with the
earth representing the nature of reality, the seeds as the four
subjects of mindfulness (smirti-upasthana), the planting of the
seeds as the four right exertions (samyak-prahanani), the
sprouting of the seeds as the four supernatural abilities (riddhi-
padah), the sending down of roots as the five psychic faculties
(indriyani), the sending forth of stems and leaves as the five
higher powers (balani), the flower as the seven aids of
enlightenment (bodhi-angani), and the fruit as the eightfold
noble path.
35 This refers to the four unhindered powers of teaching
regarding subject, meaning, expression, and eloquence. The
Buddha says “in short” here because these are but four of the

eighteen avenika-dharmas, or characteristics unique to
buddhas.
36 Section LXI. Mahamati continues his inquiry into the nature
of buddhahood. If the Buddha’s voice is like that of a kalavinka,
and he teaches the thirty-seven elements of awareness, why
does he say he doesn’t speak? This was another section of the
Lanka popular among early Zen masters.
37 The usual span given for the period during which the Buddha
taught is forty-nine years.
38 The Sanskrit for these two terms is sva-pratyatma-
dharmata and paurana-sthiti-dharmata. The essential truth
(dharmata) cannot be known through words but must be
realized. And what is realized doesn’t depend on realization,
much less words, to be true.
39 The Sanskrit is dharma-dhatu. This is one of a dozen terms
for reality. What is real is not created by a buddha, nor does it
depend on the appearance of a buddha.
40 Section LXII. In a previous section, the Buddha said
tathagatas are free from existence and nonexistence. Mahamati
still doesn’t understand the Buddha’s teaching of mind and asks
how to get free of this duality. The Buddha explains that while
these two conceptions dominate people’s thinking, including the
thinking of would-be practitioners seeking to render the
existence of their afflictions nonexistent, his teaching does not
recognize the existence of afflictions much less their annihilation.
To Hui-k’o, Bodhidharma said, “Show me this mind of yours,
and I will calm it for you.”
41 In place of the usual bhava-abhava, the Sanskrit here is
astitva-nastitva, which have roughly the same meaning:
“existence and nonexistence.”

42 Referring to the second view that the world arises from
nonexistence.
43 The Sanskrit, as is evident in Suzuki’s translation, adds the
following: “They thus talk of the really-existing world as arising
from the reality of causation. This is the realistic view of
causation as held by some people.” (ibid. pg. 125)
44 The idea here is that afflictions previously existed but due to
cultivation they ceased to exist. Hence, this is extrapolated into
the general statement that “they exist then don’t exist.”
45 The Sanskrit is vainashika. See Edgerton, page 510, where
he applies the term here to “destructionists,” those who maintain
that all entities in the world cease to exist.
46 The logic in this and the following sentence is that because
the afflictions of desire, anger, and delusion cannot be found
inside or outside practitioners, they cannot be seen to change
from existing to not existing. Hence, to make assertions about
their existence turning into nonexistence is to falsify the reality of
enlightenment as well as to falsify the reality of afflictions. Thus,
they are nihilists on both accounts. For the last line, Bodhiruchi
has “afflictions are not one and not different.” Shikshananda has
“their existence is neither different nor not different.”
47 Referring to the characteristics of the skandhas, etc. as well
as nirvana.
48 Section LXIII. Turning from belief in existence or
nonexistence, Mahamati asks about a way that transcends such
dualities. The Buddha responds by outlining the way realized by
and for oneself and the way as taught to others.
49 The Sanskrit is siddhanta-naya. Normally, siddhanta refers
to a conclusion established as the result of inquiry or logic, but
here, as elsewhere in this sutra, it refers to a conclusion based

on spiritual insight rather than logic, thus an established truth, but
one that must be realized and one that cannot be put into words.
See also Section LXXII.
50 Mara was the name of the demon that tried to tempt
Shakyamuni the night of his Enlightenment. The term is also
applied to any of Mara’s host of demons that tries to distract
practitioners.
51 The Sanskrit for “way of instruction” is deshana-naya.
52 The Mahayana Canon is usually described as having twelve
divisions. This ninefold classification includes sermons of the
Buddha (sutras), metrical pieces (geyas), prophecies
(vyakaranas), poems (gathas), impromptu statements
(udanas), narratives (ityuktas), stories of the Buddha’s
previous lives (jatakas), expanded sutras (vaipulyas), and
miracles (adbhuta-dharmas), but it excludes causal conditions
(nidanas), parables (avadanas), and treatises (upadeshas).
53 Gunabhadra has wu-ts’ui, meaning “blameless.” Hence, his
text must have involved the alliteration: niravadya
(blamelessness/stainlessness) is nirvana. Apparently, the Sanskrit
text changed. Bodhiruchi has “freedom from consciousness,”
Shikshananda has “freedom from will,” and Suzuki has “nothing
to do with intellection (manas).” If Gunabhadra is correct, the
“blame” would refer to the subject of the previous verse.
54 In Shikshananda and the Sanskrit, this first line is: “There is
no desire, anger, or delusion.”
55 Section LXIV. If our projections are unreal, as noted in the
final verses of the last section, where do they come from and
why? And why is ultimate reality not likewise subject to
projections?
56 The Sanskrit is abhuta-parikalpita, where abhuta means

“what has no foundation in reality,” and where parikalpita
means “projection.” Thus, this term is redundant, as projections
are necessarily without foundation.
57 In his answer, the Buddha responds to Mahamati’s three
questions: how do such projections arise, in what do they
consist, and where do they reside—the answer to the last being
the repository consciousness, where the habit-energy of such
projections collects.
58 This preamble to Mahamati’s question that repeats what the
Buddha has just stated is missing in Shikshananda.
59 Following the Sanskrit and the Chinese of Shikshananda,
Suzuki adds several more lines to this paragraph. I’ve followed
Gunabhadra.
60 The four possibilities in this case refer to existence,
nonexistence, both existence and nonexistence, and neither
existence nor nonexistence. The meaning here is that since
causes and conditions only exist as projections, it is projection
from which the world actually arises.
61 Gunabhadra expands this verse into six lines. I’ve condensed
it to the standard four-line format based on the translations of
Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda.
62 Commentators describe this as a fruit producing a fruit,
rather than a flower producing a fruit.
63 For this line, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit
have variations of “determine/see they are nothing but mind.”
But Gunabhadra’s version is much more interesting.
64 These are different from the four uniformities listed in Section
LX and include opposite pairs, not all of which are mentioned in
the poem due to limitations of meter. The four, which only
Gunabhdara seems aware of, include: characteristics and no

characteristics, causes and results, self and no self, practice and
practitioner.
65 This verse appears as this section’s penultimate verse in the
Sanskrit. The view that the world is a manifestation of the mind
is not supported by this sutra. This and the verses that follow
state the position upheld in the Lankavatara: that our mind is
the world and the world is our mind. If the world were a
manifestation of the mind, they would be different. But they are
neither one nor different. Time for tea.
66 This verse appears as this section’s final verse in the Sanskrit.
67 In the Sanskrit text, these last three verses appear between
verse 9 and verse 10.
68 The Sanskrit must have changed. Bodhiruchi and
Shikshananda read this line differently: “thus transcending the
mind as well,” while Suzuki renders the Sanskrit: “which is thus
free from intellection.”
69 These last four verses deal with the transformation of the five
forms of sensory consciousness, the sixth, the seventh, and the
eighth into the four kinds of knowledge. They also refer back to
the four equalities: characteristics and no characteristics, cause
and result, self and no self, practice and practitioner.
70 Section LXV. The inquiry into the misconceptions and
projections of the mind continues with speech (ruta) and
meaning (artha). The Buddha has previously told Mahamati to
rely on meaning and not on words. But without relying on
words, how are we to understand meaning? The Buddha’s only
concern is our differentiation of speech and meaning and our
attachment to one or the other. Thus, he tells Mahamati they are
neither different nor not different. If you want to see what is in a
room, you need a lamp. But viewing the lamp as different from

what is in the room is a mistake and only leads to the need for
another lamp. Meaning isn’t in the words, just as the room isn’t
in the lamp.
71 In sections XXXII and XXXIII, the Buddha explains how
word projection fails to express ultimate truth. Here, the focus is
similar but different.
72 This and the previous sentence are missing in Bodhiruchi,
Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit.
73 Instruction, reflection, and meditation comprise the three
sources of wisdom.
74 Following this sentence there are several lines not present in
Gunabhadra but present in the texts of Bodhiruchi,
Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit: “Mahamati, it is like someone
who uses a lamp to examine his possessions and knows such
and such a thing is like this and in such and such a place.
Mahamati, bodhisattvas likewise rely on the lamp of speech to
enter the realm of self-realization that is free from speech.”
75 See the passage quoted from the Samyuktagama in the note
to Section LXXV, in which the validity of these positions are all
denied.
76 If nothing exists, then spiritual cultivation is meaningless.
77 Section LXVI. From speech and meaning, the Buddha
proceeds to consciousness and knowledge, on which the
foregoing pair is based. It is the transformation of consciousness
that constitutes knowledge, but there is no knowledge outside
consciousness.
78 The Buddha focuses on knowledge here. For more on
consciousness, see Section IV in Chapter Two, where the
Buddha outlines three kinds of consciousness: “Mahamati, we
generally speak of eight forms of consciousness. But these can

be summarized under three headings: true consciousness,
perceiving consciousness, and object-projecting consciousness.”
79 As elsewhere in this sutra, individual characteristics refer to
what distinguish one entity from another, while shared
characteristics include such aspects as emptiness and the
absence of a self shared by more than one entity, if not all
entities. Here, the characteristics that are wished for refer to the
end of samsara and the attainment of nirvana.
80 The phrase “depends on personal attainment” is only present
in Gunabhadra. The Sanskrit puts this paragraph after the next
two.
81 Throughout the rest of this section “knowledge” refers to
transcendent knowledge.
82 As in the previous paragraph, this refers to transcendent
knowledge, not mundane or metaphysical knowledge.
83 According to most commentators, the “threefold
combination” refers to the powers and domains of sensation and
the forms of consciousness that arise upon their conjunction.
This term is also mentioned in sections LXVIII and LXXXII. In
Section LXXIII, however, the Buddha says followers of other
paths attribute awareness to the conjunction of self, sense
organs, and sense objects, replacing consciousness with self.
84 This line also appears in the eighth verse of Section X.
85 Gunabhadra renders this verse in six lines. I’ve condensed it
into the standard four-line format and relied on the translation of
Shikshananda in doing so.
86 Freedom from projections (nirabhasa) is a characteristic of
the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path. Thus, the “higher
stages” here refer to the ninth and tenth stages, where
buddhahood occurs.

87 This refers to the forbearance of non-arising, which is also a
characteristic of the eighth stage.
88 All three Chinese translations render this verse in six lines, as
does the Sanskrit.
89 Section LXVII. In the previous section, the Buddha
indicated that the culmination of knowledge consisted in an
understanding that nothing arises and nothing ceases. But such
an understanding is not possible if someone believes something
changes. Hence, the Buddha considers this subject in order to
lead his audience from consciousness (and projection) to
knowledge (and non-projection).
90 Where I have “origin,” Gunabhadra has shih, which is his
usual translation for vastu or dravya, meaning “object,” or
kriya, “action.” Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda, however, have
sheng, meaning “birth/rising,” and the Sanskrit has utpada,
meaning “rising/origin.” In this case, I’ve followed Bodhiruchi,
Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit.
91 As elsewhere, a city of gandharvas is made of clouds.
92 Section LXVIII. The reason people believe something
changes is because of their attachment to the projection that
something exists or does not exist. But because their underlying
projections are flawed, because they don’t realize they are
nothing but the perceptions of their own mind, they struggle to
get free in vain. The Buddha likens such people to silkworms
wrapping themselves in cocoons of delusion.
93 The Sanskrit here is sandhi, meaning “connection” or
“continuity.”
94 Gunabhadra renders vikalpa-buddhi (projections-
awareness) quite lieterally as wang-hsiang chueh (awareness of
projections). Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda ignore buddhi and

have simply wang-hsiang (projections). Suzuki puts buddhi (to
be aware, to know) at the beginning of the next sentence, where
it makes better sense. In this case, I’ve followed Suzuki.
95 These ten include vows to liberate beings regardless of the
unlimited nature of beings, worlds, space, reality, nirvana,
buddha realms, tathagata knowledge, conditions of the mind,
realms entered by buddha knowledge, and the transformation of
worlds, dharmas, and knowledge.
96 The Sanskrit is our old friend paravrtti (to
overturn/transform).
97 Such attachments as these constitute the obstruction of
knowledge and the cause of transformation death.
98 The Sanskrit adds “and of no-stages.”
99 The previous eleven continuities are those of shravakas,
pratyeka-buddhas, and followers of other paths, while these
three are common to non-practitioners. The three continuities
(tri-samtati) are also referred to as the three poisons. In either
case, these continuities constitute the obstruction of passion and
are the cause of karmic death.
100 The five destinies include rebirth among gods, humans,
animals, hungry ghosts, and the denizens of the various hells.
Asuras (gods who make war on other gods) are sometimes
added to these five, making six destinies.
101 As in Section LXVI, this refers to the powers and domains
of sensation and the forms of consciousness that arise upon their
conjunction.
102 The three liberations refer to the emptiness of the eighth
form of consciousness, the formlessness of the sixth, and the
intentionlessness of the seventh.
103 Gunabhadra renders this verse in six lines, which I have

condensed into four following the translation of Shikshananda.
104 Section LXIX. Previously, the Buddha said things have no
self-existence. But if nothing has self-existence, is this not the
same as nihilism? At the same time, the Buddha’s teaching of
personal realization would seem to be advocating self-existence.
Is this not a contradiction? Thus, Mahamati wonders if the
Buddha’s teaching does not involve attachment to views of
existence and nonexistence. The Buddha reminds him that all
teachings are expedient means, nothing more, and points him
back to personal realization. This section is also noteworthy for
the great variation among texts, as Suzuki himself noted. As
elsewhere, I’ve followed Gunabhadra.
105 Buddhists identify five kinds of vision, each associated with
a different “eye”: the physical eye sees objects in the realm of
desire, the divine eye sees objects in the realm of form, the
wisdom eye sees objects in the realm of formlessness (and thus
their emptiness), the dharma eye sees the means of liberation,
and the buddha eye sees everything.
106 The Sanskrit is arya-bhava-vastu. This is another term
peculiar to the Lankavatara. As it is used by Mahamati, not by
the Buddha, it refers to self-existence as perceived by the wise,
what elsewhere is called “perfected reality” (parinishpanna-
svabhava) .
107 Although Mahamati realizes attachment to the existence or
nonexistence of something is a delusion, he wonders if “higher
reality” is not another delusion and if those not aware of it are
thus not deluded. He repeats this view in the lines that follow.
108 Unaware of the existence of something, they are not
deluded. Unaware of what transcends existence and
nonexistence, they are not not deluded.

109 That is, if projections are inherently false, how do we
discriminate what is real?
110 The Sanskrit is vivikta (separation/detachment), which is
used here, and in Section LXXVII, as equivalent to nirvana. By
the “nonexistence of detachment,” Mahamati wonders whether
detachment is equivalent to nothingness.
111 Section LXX. The Buddha continues to develop the point
with which he closed the previous section. Talking about what is
real burns the mouth. To say anything at all is to ask for trouble.
Fortunately, the Buddha has a mouth made of asbestos. In this
case, he uses one of his own teachings as an example: “whatever
exists does not arise.” Like any teaching of the Buddha, it was
not meant as a proposition but as an expedient means to help
those attached to existence or nonexistence. Also, it only works
if it is applied to everything, including the proposition itself.
112 Without a sufficient reason a proposition cannot be
established. Hence, every proposition depends on a reason.
Thus to establish the proposition, the reason would have to
“arise.”
113 In this case, that “something” is the statement of the
proposition.
114 The use of the five-part syllogism, consisting of proposition,
reason, example, application, and conclusion, was common to a
number of schools of logic in ancient India. Buddhist texts list
thirty-three errors inherent in the use of such syllogisms.
115 The standard example is water, which fish see as we do air,
which hungry ghosts see as fire, and which devas see as
aquamarine.
116 Left unsaid here is what to teach to those fearful of the
teaching of the illusory nature of imagined reality. The teaching

used for the fearful is “the personal realization of buddha
knowledge,” which was dealt with in the previous section.
117 Although the translations of Gunabhadra and Shikshananda
are in agreement, Bodhiruchi and the Sanskrit have “no
repository consciousness” in the second line. This series
represents the denials of other paths. But if such claims were
true, those making them would have to be nonexistent
themselves.
118 The three liberations are emptiness, formlessness, and
intentionlessness.
119 All three Chinese translations render this verse in six lines,
as does the Sanskrit.
120 Section LXXI. If opening one’s mouth only leads to
trouble, what about one’s eyes and ears? How do we obtain
knowledge? And what are the obstacles? Mahamati still thinks
of knowledge as something we obtain from an external world
and still does not grasp that whatever we might know is a
perception of our own mind. It turns out no knowledge is
knowledge. Who would have guessed?
121 The Sanskrit for “knowable” is jneya, which Gunabhadra
transcribes: er-yen.
122 Namely, views that equate the absence of knowledge with
no knowledge.
123 Section LXXII. The reason Mahamati is still attached to
external existence is because he has not yet experienced the
personal realization of the knowledge of a buddha. Hence, the
Buddha repeats his earlier mention of the way of attainment
(which Suzuki translates “self-realization”) and the way of
instruction, which he dealt with earlier in Section LXIII. The way
of instruction is for external knowledge, and the way of

attainment is for knowledge that is neither external nor internal.
124 The Sanskrit is nrtyat. Normally, the term means “to
dance.” But it also means “to turn around,” which is how
Gunabhadra translated it (hui-chuan). However, Shikshananda
chose huan-huo (to be mystified), which I think comes closer to
what is meant here.
125 Again, the fourfold tetralemma: it exists, it does not exist, it
exists and does not exist, it neither exists nor does not exist.
126 The past, the present, and the future.
127 Section LXXIII. Mahamati wonders if the way of
instruction does not include other philosophies, such as
materialism. But not only do materialists confuse ordinary
people, they also use their “way of instruction” to confuse the
gods. The Buddha redirects Mahamati to the “way of
attainment,” which he also calls the “way of personal
understanding,” which, ironically, is too empirical for materialists,
as it alone is based on one’s own experience.
128 The Sanskrit for “materialist” is lokayata. This term
included all those whose approach to knowledge was based on
knowledge gained from the five senses.
129 The Sanskrit is amisha (flesh, object of enjoyment).
Gunabhadra has simply t’u (desire/lust). In this case, I’ve turned
to the Sanskrit.
130 The Sanskrit for this expression is sva-naya, or literally,
“one’s own way,” which refers to the “way of attainment” of the
previous section.
131 Shakra, also known as Indra, was chief of the gods and
himself an expositor of Buddhist doctrine.
132 The Chinese translations all have lung (dragon), but the
Sanskrit text has naga (serpent). A multiheaded, multihooded

cobra was a standard conception in ancient Indian mythology
with the snake, of course, representing the guardian of
knowledge.
133 Different sutras outline different time spans for the age in
which the Dharma flourishes and in which it can be understood.
The most common conception outlines four such periods of five
hundred years, after which people will no longer understand the
Dharma, or if they do, it will only be with the greatest difficulty
and in the most superficial manner.
134 This is a catchall phrase for the underlying duality in the
teachings of materialists concerning change.
135 The threefold gate of liberation is marked by emptiness,
formlessness, and effortlessness (or intentionlessness). In his
commentary, T’ung-jun notes, “The stance of those who
understand the way of truth of self-existence is firm. They teach
materialism all day, yet it is not materialism. Meanwhile, the
stance of those who don’t understand is unstable. They teach
what is not materialism all day, yet it turns out to be materialism.”
136 Brahmans are the priests and chief functionaries of the
various Hindu traditions. The name comes from Brahma, the
creator of the universe. The text here presents this Brahman as
arrogant and disdainful, with no respect for the Buddha’s
teaching. Although a “materialist Brahman” sounds like a
contradiction, there were materialists sects among Hindus.
137 These three were considered asamskrita (uncreated)
dharmas in the abhidharma of some sects, though not all
included nirvana. If uncreated dharmas are like this, how much
more so those that are created.
138 This refers to an existence between one life and the next.
139 These represent the views of the world as functioning either

according to causes or not according to causes—in short,
according to a deity.
140 This is a comment on the three uncreated dharmas, as
mentioned in the previous paragraph. At the end of this
paragraph, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit add:
“How much more so teachings about whether they are created
or uncreated.”
141 At this point, the Sanskrit text inserts a paragraph about a
conversation with the serpent king of Chapter One.
142 These ten vows are listed in a note to Section LXVIII.
143 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit begin this series
with another verse that clearly does not belong and must have
come from somewhere else: “Beings are attracted by training
(meditation) / morality ends their evil deeds / wisdom their
mistaken views / which lead to liberation.”
144 Section LXXIV The previous section talked about the
cause of the world according to materialists. This section talks
about liberation from the world, or nirvana. Nirvana was seen
by Hinayana Buddhists as the final and complete annihilation of
both body and mind, while Mahayana Buddhists see it as the
final and complete transformation of the bifurcating/bifurcated
mind. In addition to Buddhists, other paths had their own views
of this form of ultimate liberation, and in this section the Buddha
lists more than twenty of them.
145 This paragraph lists different versions of the view of nirvana
held by most Hinayana Buddhists; namely, it is the end of
something.
146 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda add pu (not) here (“For
some, not seeing permanence and impermanence is nirvana”),
and this is supported by the Sanskrit. However, in support of

Gunabhadra’s version, T’ung-jen notes that this was, in fact, the
view of followers of the Rudra-Shiva sect.
147 Again, Gunabhadra omits pu (non-destruction), but it is
present in Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda, who simply repeat
their rendering of the previous view.
148 Purusha is viewed by many early Hindu sects as creating
the world out of his body.
149 According to this view, which is interpreted differently by
the different commentators, the tendencies (gunas) are
permanent and combine to form objects of sensation, which are
impermanent.
150 The last part of this sentence is also handled differently by
Bodhiruchi: “the end of affliction is due to wisdom” and
Shikshananda: “the end of affliction is not due to wisdom.”
151 Brahma and Shiva are the standard examples of such a
power.
152 As noted earlier, the three tendencies (gunas) of creation,
stasis, and destruction were considered the forces or building
blocks of reality by the Samkhyas.
153 According to the Samkhyas, the primordial darkness gives
rise to awareness, which gives rise to the sense of self, which
gives rise to the five subtle elements, which give rise to the five
gross elements, which give rise to the eleven bases of sensation,
which altogether is twenty-five realities.
154 According to the Vaisheshikas, the six included substance
(dravya), tendency (guna), action (karma), sameness
(samanya), difference (vishesha), and combination
(samavaya).
155 For the last few lines, Bodhiruchi has: “There are followers
of still other paths who say distinguishing something that exists,

or something that doesn’t exist, or something that exists and
does not exist is nirvana.” Shikshananda has: “Some imagine
something that exists or does not exist is nirvana, while others
imagine nirvana as no difference between nirvana or anything
else.” The Sanskrit agrees with Shikshananda.
156 These pairs include no self among beings or things, the
afflictions of the senses and what arises from them, the
obstructions of passion and knowledge, and karmic and
transformation death.
157 Pain resulting from direct causes, from deprivation and from
impermanence. Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all
have “words give rise to the three realms.”
158 In this metaphor, the world is likened to the image and the
mind to the mirror. To know which is which is to know the mind
and the world. For the first line, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and
the Sanskrit have variations of “who doesn’t know what they
perceive is only mind.” Likewise, for the third line, they all have
“who knows it is only mind.” The readings of lines two and four
are the same in all versions.
159 Section LXXV. In the previous section, the Buddha moves
away from the traditional view of nirvana as the end of
something to the later view that it is marked by the presence of
something, namely enlightenment. Hence, Mahamati asks about
enlightenment. But in defining enlightenment, the Buddha avoids
any of the major dualities: it is neither different nor not different
from the skandhas, from liberation, or from wisdom.
160 In place of yu (want), Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda have
variations of “accept.” The reason for such a reaction by
buddhas is that if any result were tantamount to buddhahood,
this would sever the relationship between practice and

attainment.
161 In the Samyuktagama, the Buddha asks the ascetic
Shrenika Vatsagotra if the Tathagata is the same as the
skandhas, and Shrenika says, “No, Bhagavan.” Again the
Buddha asks if the Tathagata is separate from the skandhas, and
again Shrenika answers, “No, Bhagavan.” The Buddha then
asks if the Tathagata is inside the skandhas. Again Shrenika
answers, “No, Bhagavan.” The Buddha then asks if the
skandhas are inside the Tathagata. Once more Shrenika says,
“No, Bhagavan.” Finally the Buddha asks if the Tathagata is not
the skandhas, to which Shrenika answers, “No, Bhagavan.”
(105) Likewise, in the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight
Thousand Lines, the Buddha says that enlightenment is neither
inside the skandhas nor outside them, nor both inside and
outside them, nor other than the skandhas. (1/9) Two horns one
bull.
162 This repetition of the initial pair is only present in
Gunabhadra.
163 In this and the following sentence, Bodhiruchi,
Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all have “like space” instead of
“essentially nirvana.”
164 In this series of verses, as in the foregoing text, the third
person singular refers to enlightenment, the subject about which
Mahamati asked.
165 This refers to the twelve nidanas, or links, that make up the
chain of dependent origination that begins with ignorance and
memory and ends with old age and death.
166 For this line, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit
have variations of “it isn’t the skandhas and not not the
skandhas.”

167 Section LXXVI. Mahamati inquires further into the nature
of a tathagata. Previously he was told to let go of appearances.
Now it is names. Here, he focuses on one particular name used
to describe and refer to a tathagata but misunderstands it,
thinking “what neither arises nor ceases” must necessarily refer
to nothing (meaning) or something (words). The Buddha
reminds him not to focus on words but on meaning and that
meaning is neither a nothing nor a something.
168 The Sanskrit is anirodha-anutpada.
169 Implicit in Mahamati’s question is the suspicion that the
Buddha’s statements are contradictory. If “what neither arises
nor ceases” refers to nothing, this is tantamount to nihilism; if it
refers to something, such as a name, it is tantamount to
eternalism.
170 Gunabhadra’s is the only translation that includes this
statement. It is because nothing arises that there is no
“something,” and it is because nothing ceases, there is no
“nothing.”
171 The projection bodies of a buddha are also mentioned in
sections XXX, LII, and LVII. Of the three types of projection
bodies mentioned, this is the third type, which is able to teach
the Dharma.
172 Indra is chief of the gods and is also known as Shakra and
Purandara.
173 The water represents the minds of all beings, and the moon
is the body of the Tathagata.
174 This is a difficult sentence and is variously interpreted by
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and Suzuki. I’ve followed
Gunabhadra who understands this as confronting the problem of
a meaning that transcends words.

175 The reasoning here is that such beings are still dependent on
the way of instruction and not yet ready for the way of
attainment. Language is for those in need of instruction, no
language is for those ready to see for themselves.
176 There are different lists of these powers, but the most
typical is the one that includes a knowledge or mastery of right
and wrong, karma, meditation, the senses, desires, natures,
directions, past lives, divine sight, and passionlessness.
177 Gunabhadra has “foolish person,” but in this case I’ve
followed Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit.
178 Gunabhadra and Shikshananda have the infant going mad.
Certainly feeding a child uncooked rice would not make it
happy, but mad, as in crazy? I’ve turned to Bodhiruchi in this
case.
179 Only Gunabhadra has this sentence.
180 Section LXXVII. Mahamati continues his inquiry and
wonders if the Buddha’s teaching of what neither arises nor
ceases differs from that of other schools. The Buddha tells him
that despite their usage of similar expressions, there is always
something behind the words of other schools, while he uses this
term because everything is illusory and neither arises nor ceases.
What seems to arise or cease are nothing but the perceptions of
one’s own mind.
181 At the beginning of Chapter One and Chapter Two,
Mahamati also rises by the Buddha’s power to ask his
questions. It’s been awhile, but the sutra reminds us that it is
really a dialogue engineered by the Buddha to question himself.
Then, too, Mahamati asks questions he might not normally ask
and represents the views of others who might have such doubts
in the future.

182 The causes are listed at the end of the next paragraph.
183 The Sanskrit is apratisamkhya-nirodha. This is one of the
two types of cessation recognized by the Sarvastivadins and one
of the six uncreated dharmas of the Yogacarins. This refers to
the cessation of whatever gives rise to suffering not as the result
of analysis and understanding, but simply as the result of
fortuitous circumstances. Hence, it is temporary.
184 Not mentioned here are: time, direction, space and Brahma.
185 This probably refers to a creator god, such as Brahma, who
does not arise or change. Or it could refer to death. All three
Chinese translations have bien (changing) here, instead of the
usual mieh (ceasing).
186 That is, they seem not to be false.
187 The Sanskrit is avivikta-darshana, which is similar to
avivikta-drishti, both of which mean “to not see
clearly/distinctly.”
188 Section LXXVIII. This section denies doctrines of arising,
establishes the truth of non-arising, and treats doctrines of other
paths claiming non-arising and non-cessation as projections and
as just more versions of arising. There is considerable variation
among the translations for this section. As elsewhere, I’ve
followed Gunabhadra, unless otherwise noted.
189 For this line, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit
have “I teach the truth of ‘no cause’ (abetu-vada).”
190 I’ve followed Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit
for this line, which is not clear in Gunabhadra.
191 This verse is rendered in six lines by all versions.
192 Another verse rendered by all versions in six lines. Only
Gunabhadra has chih-jan (bright light).
193 Bodhiruchi omits most of this. Shikshananda has this verse

in four lines. Gunabhadra renders it in six lines, which I’ve
summarized in four.
194 Non-arising (the forbearance of non-arising) is associated
with the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path. Hence,
bodhisattvas of the first seven stages do not understand this
teaching.
195 Gunabhadra omits the last line. I’ve followed Bodhiruchi,
Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit in including it.
196 Three of this verse’s four lines and the first two lines of the
next verse are missing in Gunabhadra. I’ve followed
Shikshananda.
197 Imagined (parikalpita) and dependent (paratantra)
reality.
198 The Sanskrit is paravrtti-ashraya, overturning the basis,
transforming the foundation.
199 For the last two lines, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the
Sanskrit all have variations of “except when things combine /
something is seen arising or ceasing.”
200 The lamp, for example.
201 For the last line, Bodhiruchi has “which isn’t known to
fools,” while Shikshananda and the Sanskrit have “which is what
fools perceive.”
202 The forbearance of the non-arising of all things is attained at
the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path. The Sanskrit is
anutpattika-dharma-kshanti.
203 For the third line, Gunabhadra has “everything free from
chains.” But no other edition agrees.
204 From a bow drill comes fire, from clay comes a pot, from a
wheel comes a cart, from seeds come plants.
205 For the last line, Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda have, “and

thus negate the teaching.”
206 These refer to the four elements of earth, water, fire, and
wind.
207 For this last line, Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the
Sanskrit have: “the auspicious Eightfold Noble Path.” The
Buddha’s meaning here is that while afflictions and
understandings might differ, what appear as different teachings
are not different teachings. If they were different, they would not
be Mahayana teachings.
208 Section LXXIX. The recognition of impermanence
underlies the Buddha’s teaching. But the Buddha was not alone
in such recognition. Other schools also taught impermanence.
This section presents an admittedly convoluted review of their
views and notes their inherent flaws and concludes with the
Buddha’s teaching. Some of the views criticized involve
differences as to how the material world and the elements of
which it is composed are understood, others differ as to whether
impermanence is some kind of independent entity. All of these
views, however, fail to realize that whatever they perceive is
nothing but the mind. Permanence and impermanence are
irrelevant.
209 Bodhiruchi says “eight kinds.” Suzuki points out what he
thinks must be Bodhiruchi’s eighth kind, but I think it is simply an
explanation, which is something Bodhiruchi frequently adds to
his translation.
210 That is, things are abandoned by the causes that gave rise
to them.
211 Buddhists differentiate shape (samsthana) and form
(rupa). Shape is the external appearance of material form, while
form is anything external, material or not, and includes sound,

smell, taste, and touch.
212 In the paragraphs that follow, the Buddha explains these
seven kinds of impermanence, but in an order different from his
initial list: 6, 7, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4. Note that in his explanations of
these seven, the Buddha presents them from the points of view
of their adherents followed by comments of his own.
213 Roof tiles were sufficiently heavy to keep from being blown
off.
214 Samkhyas believed that the world was a combination of
matter and spirit, with the former being made of varying amounts
of gunas (tendencies or qualities) of creation, stasis, and
destruction that were permanent and indestructible.
215 This refers to materialists who held that the world (loka)
alone exists, that it is made up of the four elements, and that only
knowledge gained through the five senses is valid. Thus, worldly
conventions are, as a rule, invalid.
216 This is the fourth kind of impermanence mentioned at the
beginning of this section.
217 The world-destroying conflagration at the end of a series of
kalpas.
218 In summarizing some of the kinds of impermanence
mentioned in this verse, the Buddha sees such conceptions as
irrelevant. Arguments about impermanence are themselves
nothing but mind.
219 For this last verse, Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda have:
“Everything including Brahma’s heavens / I say are nothing but
mind / apart from the mind / there is nothing to be found.” Some
sects held that Brahma alone was permanent but everything
created by him was not. His heaven is located beyond the realm
of desire at the base of the realm of form.

CHAPTER FOUR:
FINAL QUESTIONS1

LXXX2
Mahamati Bodhisattva again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan,
would you please explain for bodhisattvas, shravakas, and
pratyeka-buddhas the sequence of stages involving the Samadhi
of Cessation,3 so that once I and the other bodhisattvas better
understand this sequence, we will not wrongly forsake4 the bliss
of the Samadhi of Cessation or fall prey to the foolishness of
shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, or followers of other paths.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder it
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati answered the Buddha, “Would the Bhagavan
please instruct us.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “It is at the sixth stage that
bodhisattvas, shravakas, and pratyeka-buddhas enter the
Samadhi of Cessation.5 At the seventh stage, bodhisattvas think
thoughts during this samadhi, but thoughts that are free from any
characteristic of self-existence.6 This is not true of shravakas or
pratyeka-buddhas. Shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas fall prey
to their own accomplishments and are aware of a practitioner
and a practice during this samadhi. Therefore, at the seventh
stage they do not think thoughts. Instead of the undif ferentiated
nature of things, they still perceive their different characteristics
during this samadhi, such as which are good or bad.7 Hence, at

the seventh stage they are unable to think during this samadhi.
“Mahamati, from the first to the seventh stage,8 bodhisattvas
see the three realms as nothing but mind, will, and conceptual
consciousness and without a self or what belongs to a self. But
for bodhisattvas, shravakas, and pratyeka-buddhas at the eighth
stage, projections of mind, will, and conceptual consciousness
cease. Meanwhile, those fools who cultivate their own
projections remain trapped by the myriad characteristics of
external entities and see things in terms of the dialectic of subject
and object unaware that these are the result of habit-energy
from the beginningless past.
“Mahamati, at the eighth stage, bodhisattvas, shravakas, and
pratyeka-buddhas experience nirvana. But because bodhisattvas
are supported by buddhas during samadhi,9 despite the bliss of
samadhi, they do not enter nirvana. Without such support, they
would not complete the tathagata stage and would give up all
that they do for other beings and would sever their membership
in the lineage of buddhas. Therefore, the buddhas tell them of
the inconceivable and infinite virtues of a tathagata. Meanwhile,
shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas are seduced by the bliss of
samadhi and create the thought of nirvana.
“Mahamati, I have distinguished these seven stages that
involve examining characteristics of the mind, the will, and
conceptual consciousness, and that involve examining the self
and what belongs to a self and the absence of a self among both
persons and things, and that involve examining the individual and
shared characteristics of what arises and ceases, and that also
involve mastery of the four unhindered powers of argument and
judgment,10 samadhi, the sequence of stages, and the elements
of awareness in order to prevent bodhisattvas unaware of

individual or shared characteristics and unfamiliar with the seven
stages from falling prey to the mistaken doctrines of other paths.
This is why I teach a sequence of stages.
“Mahamati, there is nothing that actually arises or ceases. The
sequence of stages and all the phenomena in the three realms are
nothing but perceptions of one’s own mind. But fools are
unaware of this. And because they are unaware, I and other
buddhas talk about a sequence of stages and talk about the
phenomena of the three realms.
“Moreover, Mahamati, shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas at
the eighth bodhisattva stage become so intoxicated by the bliss
of the Samadhi of Cessation, they fail to realize it is nothing but
the perception of their own mind. Obstructed by the habit-
energy of individual and shared characteristics, they fall prey to
views of attachment to no self among persons and things and
give rise to conceptions of nirvana, not to an understanding of
detachment from dharmas,11
“Mahamati, whenbodhisattvas experience the bliss of the
Samadhi of Cessation, because of their earlier vows of
compassion to complete the ten inexhaustible deeds,12 they do
not give rise to conceptions of nirvana. And because
conceptions of nirvana do not arise, they transcend projections
of grasping and what is grasped and realize that these are
nothing but perceptions of their own mind. And because they do
not give rise to projections of any kind, they do not fall prey to
projections of the mind, will, or conceptual consciousness or
characteristics of external existence. They do not give rise to
what is not conducive to the Dharma. And as their wisdom
grows, they reach the tathagata stage of self-realization.
“It is like someone crossing a river in a dream who wakes up

before they are across.13 Once they are awake, they wonder if
it was real or not. But it was neither real nor not real. It was only
because of the different habit-energy of the traces that remained
from the sights, sounds, feelings, and thoughts from the
beginningless past that different shapes appeared and
disappeared in the dream that is the mind, the will, and
conceptual consciousness.
“Mahamati, this is how bodhisattvas at the eighth stage view
the arising of projections. As they progress from the first stage
through the seventh stage, they see everything as an illusion. But
once they transcend projections of subject and object, they
undertake the work of the Dharma so that those who have not
yet understood understand. Mahamati, this is the nirvana of
bodhisattvas. It does not involve annihilation. And because they
transcend the mind, the will, and conceptual consciousness, they
achieve the forbearance of non-arising. Mahamati, the ultimate
truth includes no sequence of stages. The absence of all
projections, this is what is meant by detachment from
dharmas.”14
1. “Nothing but mind and no projections15 / this
abode and the buddha stage16 / these are what tathagatas
teach / past, present, and those to come
2. Nothing but mind is the seventh stage / no
projections is the eighth / of the two stages where I dwell17
/ the buddha stage is supreme
3. Self-realization and purity / these make up my
world / in the highest heaven of heavens18 / adorned with
the purest forms

4. With the blazing fire of knowledge / filling all
directions with light / with a radiance that doesn’t blind / I
appear throughout the three realms
5. I appear in the present world / I appear in worlds
gone by / the paths I teach in each / all lead to the buddha
stage
6. The tenth stage thus becomes the first / the first
becomes the eighth / the ninth becomes the seventh / and
the seventh becomes the eighth
7. The second becomes the third / the fourth
becomes the fifth / the third becomes the sixth / but which
is free from projections?”19

LXXXI20
Mahamati again asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, are the
tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones permanent or
impermanent?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “The tathagatas, the arhats, the
fully enlightened ones are neither permanent nor impermanent.
Either assertion would be mistaken.21 If they were permanent,
the problem would be that of a first cause22 because what is
permanent, according to followers of other paths, is a first cause
that is not itself caused. Hence, the permanence of tathagatas
would not be permanent because the problem would be that of
not possessing the permanence of a first cause. And if tathagatas
were impermanent, the problem would be that of the
impermanence of a first cause. Also, since the characteristics
characterized by the skandhas do not exist by themselves, when
the skandhas disappear, the tathagatas should cease to exist. But
they do not cease to exist.
“Mahamati, everything that is caused is impermanent, like a
pot or a robe. But if everything suffered from impermanence, all
knowledge, attainments, and skills would be meaningless
because they would be caused. And everything caused would
be a tathagata because its causal basis would be the same.
Therefore, Mahamati, tathagatas are neither permanent nor

impermanent.
“Moreover, Mahamati, tathagatas are not permanent like
space.23 If they were permanent like space, their attainment of
the self-realization of buddha knowledge would be meaningless.
Mahamati, if anything were like space, it would be neither
permanent nor impermanent. It would transcend permanence
and impermanence. Because of the problems of permanence
and impermanence, it could not be said to be one or the other or
both or neither. Therefore, tathagatas are not permanent.
“Again, Mahamati, if tathagatas possessed the permanence of
what does not arise,24 such as that of rabbit horns or horse
horns, because of the permanence of what does not arise, their
practice would be meaningless. Thus, because of the problems
with a permanence that does not arise, tathagatas are not
permanent.
“Moreover, Mahamati, there is another aspect in which we
know tathagatas are permanent. And what aspect is that? The
knowledge attained by realization is permanent. Therefore,
tathagatas are permanent. Mahamati, whether tathagatas appear
in the world or do not appear in the world, the Dharma is fixed
and abiding.25 Shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, and tathagatas all
dwell in realization, not in space. But this is not something fools
would know.
“Mahamati, the knowledge attained by tathagatas is the result
of prajna26 and not the result of the skandhas, dhatus, or
ayatanas or the mind, the will, or conceptual consciousness.
Mahamati, everything in the three realms arises from false
projections. But tathagatas do not arise from false or empty
projections.
“Mahamati, it is because of duality that there is permanence

and impermanence, not because of non-duality. Non-duality
means detachment, where nothing is characterized by the
appearance
of
dualistic
characteristics.
Therefore,
the
tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones are neither
permanent nor impermanent. Mahamati, whenever distinctions
of language occur, there are problems regarding permanence
and impermanence. Only when distinctions cease are they
transcended. But foolish people are not detached from views of
permanence and impermanence. It is the wise who once and for
all transcend permanence and impermanence and who are not
affected by either.”
1. “Neither permanent nor impermanent / but
perceived as permanent or impermanent / who sees the
buddhas like this / doesn’t give rise to mistaken views 27
2. The meaninglessness of accomplishments / results
from permanence or impermanence / whose knowledge is
free
from
distinctions
/
leaves
permanence
and
impermanence forever
3. Once a position is established / a multitude of
truths appear28 / who sees nothing but mind / cannot be
touched by words.”

LXXXII29
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, would
you please explain again the arising and cessation of the
skandhas, dhatus, and ayatanas? If they contain no self, who
arises, and who ceases? Foolish people rely on arising and
cessation and fail to experience an end of suffering and fail to
know nirvana.”
The Buddha said, “Excellent. Listen carefully, and I will tell
you.”
Mahamati replied, “May we be so instructed.”
The Buddha said, “The tathagata-garbha is the cause of
whatever is good or bad and is responsible for every form of
existence everywhere. It is like an actor who changes
appearances in different settings but who lacks a self or what
belongs to a self. Because this is not understood, followers of
other paths unwittingly imagine an agent responsible for the
effects that arise from the threefold combination.30
“When it is impregnated by the habit-energy of beginningless
fabrications, it is known as the repository consciousness and
gives birth to fundamental ignorance 31 along with seven kinds of
consciousness. It is like the ocean whose waves rise without
cease. But it transcends the misconception of impermanence or
the conceit of a self and is essentially pure and clear.

“The seven kinds of thoughts of the remaining forms of
consciousness—the will, conceptual consciousness, and the
others—rise and cease as the result of mistakenly projecting and
grasping external appearances. Because people are attached to
the names and appearances of all kinds of shapes, they are
unaware that such forms and characteristics are the perceptions
of their own minds and that bliss or suffering do not lead to
liberation. As they become enveloped by names and
appearances, their desires arise and create more desires, each
becoming the cause or condition of the next. Only if their senses
stopped functioning, and the remaining projections of their minds
no longer arose, and they did not distinguish bliss or suffering,
would they enter the Samadhi of Cessation of Sensation and
Perception in the fourth dhyana heaven.32 However, in their
cultivation of the truths of liberation,33 they give rise to the
concept of liberation and fail to transcend or transform what is
called the repository consciousness of the tathagata-garbha.
And the seven kinds of consciousness never stop flowing. And
how so? Because the different kinds of consciousness arise as a
result of causes and conditions. This is not the understanding of
shravaka or pratyeka-buddha practitioners, as they do not
realize there is no self that arises from grasping the individual or
shared characteristics of the skandhas, dhatus, or ayatanas.34
For those who see the tathagata-garbha, the five dharmas, the
modes of existence, and the two kinds of no-self cease to
exist.35 And once they progress through the sequence of stages
and are not swayed by the views of other paths, they are said to
dwell in the unshakeable stage36 of bodhisattvas, where they
enjoy the bliss of the ten samadhis.37 Supported by the buddhas
during such samadhis, they reflect on the inconceivable Dharma.

But because of their vows, they do not grasp the bliss of
samadhi or ultimate reality.38 And by means of the personal
realization of buddha knowledge, which is not among the
practices of shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, or followers of other
paths, they complete the ten-stage path of the lineage of sages,39
and they acquire bodies of knowledge and projection that
transcend samadhi.
“Therefore, Mahamati, bodhisattvas who seek the highest
goal should purify what are called the tathagata-garbha and the
repository consciousness.40 Mahamati, if there were nothing
called the repository consciousness, the tathagatagarbha would
neither arise nor cease.41 But sages and fools alike experience
arising and cessation, Mahamati. Therefore, practitioners who
cultivate the personal realization of buddha knowledge dwell in
the bliss of whatever is present and do not abandon their
practice.
“Mahamati, although this repository consciousness of the
tathagata-garbha seen by the minds of shravakas and pratyeka-
buddhas is essentially pure, because it is obscured by the dust of
sensation, it appears impure—but not to tathagatas. To
tathagatas, Mahamati, the realm that appears before them is like
an amala42 fruit in the palm of their hand.
“Mahamati, I have used my spiritual power to support Queen
Shrimala43 and other bodhisattvas of deep wisdom to explain
the meaning of what are called the repository consciousness and
the tathagata-garbha, which appear together with the seven
other kinds of consciousness, so that those shravakas still
attached to them might see that persons and dharmas are
without a self. Thus supported by the power of the Buddha,
Queen Shrimala explained the realm of understanding of

tathagatas and not the realm of understanding of shravakas,
pratyeka-buddhas, or other paths. The repository consciousness
of the tathagata-garbha is something only buddhas and those
wisest of bodhisattvas who rely on meaning understand.44
Therefore you and the other bodhisattvas should diligently reflect
on the repository consciousness of the tathagata-garbha. Don’t
simply think hearing about this is enough.”
1. “Deep is the tathagata-garbha / with seven kinds of
consciousness / the two kinds of grasping that arise45 / are
avoided by the wise
2. The mind is like a reflected image / the result of
habit-energy without beginning / for those who see what is
real / whatever is seen isn’t seen
3. Like fools who see me point to the moon / look at
my finger and not at the moon / those who cling to names /
don’t see this truth of mine
4. The mind is the hero in a play / the will is the hero’s
confidant / the five forms of consciousness are the cast /
projections are the audience.”

LXXXIII46
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “May the Bhagavan please
explain the essential distinguishing characteristics of the five
dharmas, the modes of existence, the forms of consciousness,
and the two kinds of no-self. For as I and the other bodhisattvas
distinguish these during the sequence of stages, we will penetrate
the teaching of every buddha. And by penetrating the teaching of
every buddha, we will eventually reach the realm of a tathagata’s
own realization.”
The Buddha said, “Listen carefully, Mahamati, most carefully,
and think about what you hear.”
Mahamati replied, “May we be so instructed.”
The
Buddha
told
Mahamati,
“The
distinguishing
characteristics of the five dharmas, the modes of existence, the
forms of consciousness, and the two kinds of no-self include
name and appearance, projection, correct knowledge, and
suchness. 47 As practitioners cultivate these and reach the realm
of personal realization of buddha knowledge, they transcend
views of eternity and annihilation and existence and nonexistence
and dwell in the bliss of meditating on what is present and what
appears before them.48 Mahamati, because they are unaware
that the five dharmas, the modes of existence, the forms of
consciousness, and the two kinds of no-self are perceptions of

their own minds, fools imagine their external existence, but not
the wise.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, why do fools give
rise to projections and not the wise?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Fools let their thoughts wander
among the names and appearances of convention to which they
are attached. And as they wander among the multitude of
shapes that appear, they fall prey to views and longings
concerning a self and what belongs to a self, and they become
attached to excelling. And once they are attached, they are
blinded by ignorance and give rise to passion. And once they
are inflamed, the karma produced by desire, anger, and delusion
accumulates. And as it accumulates, they become enveloped in
their own projections, like silkworms in cocoons, or submerged
in boundless states of existence in the sea of birth and death, as
if they were on a waterwheel. But because of their ignorance,
they do not realize that their own existence is an illusion, a
mirage, a reflection of the moon in water, and without a self or
what belongs to a self, that it is devoid of the origination,
duration, or cessation of what characterizes or what is
characterized, and that it arises from the projections of their own
mind and not from a creator, time, motes of dust, or a supreme
being. Thus do fools wander among names and appearances.
“Mahamati, as for appearance, what appears to visual
consciousness, we name ‘form.’ What appears to auditory,
olfactory, gustatory, tactile, or conceptual consciousness, we
name ‘sound,’ ‘smell,’ ‘taste,’ ‘feeling,’ or ‘thought.’ These are
the names for appearances.49
“Mahamati, projection fabricates names and points to
appearances as being ‘like this and not something else.’ What

we name an elephant or a horse, a charioteer or a foot soldier, a
man or a woman, this is what is meant by projection.
“Mahamati, according to correct knowledge, names and
appearances are indistinguishable—like passersby. When the
different forms of consciousness do not arise, and they are
neither annihilated nor eternal, and one does not end up in the
realms of shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, or other paths, this is
what is meant by correct knowledge.50
“Moreover, Mahamati, as a result of correct knowledge,
bodhisattvas neither assert names or appearances, nor do they
not assert names or appearances. They avoid dualistic views of
assertion or denial because they know that names and
appearances do not arise. This is what is meant by ‘suchness.’
“Mahamati, because bodhisattvas who dwell in suchness
reach the realm that is free from projections, they reach the
bodhisattva’s stage of joy. And once they reach the
bodhisattva’s stage of joy, they leave the false realms of other
paths forever and dwell in transcendent realms, where they
become proficient in distinguishing the characteristics of all
dharmas as illusory, including the characteristics of the realm of
personal realization, and where they see their nature as different
from their characteristics while remaining free from projections,
and where they eventually reach the dharma cloud stage51 and
therein the full unfolding of samadhis, higher powers, masteries,
and spiritual faculties. And upon reaching the tathagata stage, the
light of their various transformations radiates like the moon on
the water and brings beings to maturity by teaching them in
accordance with their desires and understanding, as they thereby
fulfill the ten inexhaustible vows.52 A dharma body that
transcends the products of thought, this is what bodhisattvas

who dwell in suchness obtain.”
Mahamati then asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, are the three
modes of reality part of the five dharmas, or do they each have
their own independent characteristics?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “The three modes of reality as
well as the eight forms of consciousness and the two kinds of
no-self are all included in the five dharmas. Mahamati, name and
appearance are the imagined mode of reality. Mahamati,
because the mind and what belongs to the mind53 are dependent
on projection for their existence and arise together with name,
just as do the sun and its rays, and because they are supported
by the differentiation of their various appearances, they
constitute the dependent mode. And, Mahamati, because
correct knowledge and suchness are indestructible, they make
up the perfected mode.
“Moreover, Mahamati, the projections that are the
perceptions of one’s own mind are of eight kinds, namely, those
of the repository consciousness, the will, conceptual
consciousness, and the five forms of sensory consciousness.54
But their appearances are not real because they are projections.
And when the twofold grasping of a self and what belongs to a
self ceases, the two kinds of no-self arise.55”Thus, Mahamati,
the sequence of stages that lead shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas,
bodhisattvas, and tathagatas to the self-realization of buddha
knowledge and all the teachings of buddhas are included in the
five dharmas.

LXXXIV56
“Moreover, Mahamati, the five dharmas include appearance,
name, projection, suchness, and correct knowledge.57
Mahamati, appearance is what is perceived as having physical
shape and features. This is what is meant by appearance. If a
certain appearance is referred to as a pot and not something
else, this is what is meant by name. Designating names and
pointing to appearances, as in the case of a pot, involve the mind
and what belongs to the mind. This is what is meant by
projection. But names and appearances are essentially
ungraspable and ultimately unknowable. What is not affected by
anything and what transcends mistaken projections, this is what
is meant by suchness. What is real, true, certain, ultimate, self-
existent, and ungraspable,58 these are the characteristics of
suchness. The characteristics I and all buddhas accordingly
attain and truly explain and designate and indicate to others so
that they are able to reach a true understanding of what is neither
annihilated nor eternal and so that they do not give rise to
projections but reach the realm of the personal realization of
buddha knowledge beyond the reach of shravakas, pratyeka-
buddhas and followers of other paths, this is what is meant by
correct knowledge.
“And this, Mahamati, is what is meant by how the five

dharmas include the three modes of reality, the eight forms of
consciousness, the two kinds of no-self, and all the teachings
ofbuddhas. Therefore, Mahamati, you should cultivate these in
your own practice and teach others not to follow anything else.”
1. “The five dharmas include the three modes of
existence / the eight forms of consciousness / the two kinds
of no-self / the entire Mahayana
2. Name, appearance, and projection / these form the
first two modes / correct knowledge and suchness / these
form the perfected mode.”

LXXXV59
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “According to a
statement made by the Bhagavan, ‘the buddhas of the past are
like the sand of the Ganges, as are those of the future and the
present.’ Bhagavan, are we to accept this as stated, or does it
have another meaning? May the Tathagata be so compassionate
as to explain this.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “You should not accept this as
stated. The number of buddhas in the three periods is not like
the sand of the Ganges. And why not? Because they surpass
worldly expectations and are not comparable to any
comparison. But because foolish people are attached to
permanence, and because followers of other paths foster their
own pernicious views and projections,60 and their births and
deaths are endless, in order to encourage their aversion to the
wheel of birth and death and their effort to advance, I tell them
buddhas are easy to encounter, not like udumbara flowers,61
which are hard to encounter, and they are worth looking for. But
other times, when I see those who are receptive to instruction, I
tell them buddhas are as hard to encounter as an udumbara
flower.62 An udumbara flower has never been seen, is not seen,
and never will be seen.63 Tathagatas, however, are seen in every
world. But the reason I liken a tathagata’s appearance in the

world to an udumbara flower is not in order to establish
personal understanding.64 Mahamati, those who establish their
own understanding are beyond worldly expectations, and
ordinary people find it hard to believe them, for there is nothing
to which the realm of personal realization of buddha knowledge
can be compared. Tathagatas are truly beyond the
characteristics perceived by the mind, the will, or conceptual
consciousness. They are beyond comparison.
“Nevertheless, Mahamati, my comparison of tathagatas to the
sand of the Ganges is not mistaken. 65Mahamati, they are
compared to the sand of the Ganges because when turtles or
otters or lions or elephants or horses or people or animals tread
on it, the sand doesn’t give rise to projections and think ‘they
are disturbing me,’ for its nature is pure and free from such
defilements. The self-realization of buddha knowledge of the
tathagatas, the arhats, the fully enlightened ones is the Ganges,
while their higher powers, spiritual faculties, and masteries are
the sand. No matter how animals and people and followers of
other paths try to disturb them, tathagatas do not give rise to
projections or concerns. Tathagatas remain at peace and free
from thoughts of discrimination. And the freedom of tathagatas
from disturbance is no different than that of the sand of the
Ganges because they have vowed to comfort beings with the
bliss of samadhi, and because they have eliminated anger and
desire.
“For example, the essential nature of the sand of the Ganges
is earth. But when the kalpa-ending fire66 burns up everything
made of earth, the essential nature of the element of earth is not
lost because it arises together with the element of fire. Fools in
other worlds67 imagine that earth is burned up. But earth is not

burned up because fire is its cause.68 In the same manner,
Mahamati, a tathagata’s dharma body is indestructible, like the
sand of the Ganges.69
“Mahamati, just as the sand of the Ganges is beyond
measure, a tathagata’s light is likewise beyond measure. It shines
on all buddha assemblies everywhere in order to bring beings to
maturity.
“Mahamati, just as the sand of the Ganges could never seek
to be other than sand, likewise, Mahamati, the tathagatas, the
arhats, the fully enlightened ones are free from birth and death,
origination and cessation, because they have put an end to the
cause of existence.70
“Mahamati, just as it is impossible to know if the sand of the
Ganges increases or decreases, the same is true, Mahamati, of
the wisdom of tathagatas that brings beings to maturity, for it
neither increases nor decreases because it is not a physical
dharma.71 Physical dharmas can be destroyed, but the dharma
body of a tathagata is not a physical dharma.
“And just as pressing the sand of the Ganges does not
produce cooking oil, even if tathagatas are pressed by beings in
the most intense kinds of pain because of their great
compassion, as long as any being has not yet attained nirvana,
they do not abandon the Dharma Realm72 for the wished-for
joys of samadhi.
“Mahamati, just as the sand of the Ganges flows together with
the river’s water and not where there is no water, likewise,
Mahamati, all the teachings spoken by the tathagatas flow
together with nirvana and thus are said to be like the sand of the
Ganges. However, tathagatas do not flow or go73 anywhere
because to go means to disappear. Mahamati, the ultimate

beginning of samsara cannot be known. And because it cannot
be known, how can anyone speak of going? Mahamati, foolish
people do not understand that to go means to cease to exist.”
Mahamati asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan, if beings cannot
know the ultimate beginning of samsara, how can they know
liberation?”74
The Buddha told Mahamati, “When one understands that the
external world is a perception of one’s own mind, the cause of
the habit-energy of beginningless projections ceases, and there is
a transformation of one’s imaginary body. This is liberation not
cessation. Therefore, what has no boundary75 does not mean
nothing at all because such an expression as ‘what has no
boundary’ is a product of projection. Whether you look inside
or outside, apart from projection, there are no other beings.
Whether it is what knows or what is known, everything is still.
As long as you don’t recognize that your projections are
perceptions of your own mind, projections arise. Once you do,
they cease.”
1. “Who views the tathagatas / like the sand of the
Ganges / not destroyed or disappearing / they can see the
buddhas76
2. What is a buddha’s body like / like the sand of the
Ganges / flowing unpolluted / flowing on forever.”77

LXXXVI78
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “Could the
Bhagavan please explain how dharmas are momentary and
subject to destruction?79 Why are they momentary?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen closely and think about
what I tell you.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “All dharmas are either good,
bad or neutral, created or uncreated, mundane or transcendent,
karmic or non-karmic, defiled or undefiled, perceptible or
imperceptible. Briefly, Mahamati, the five grasping skandhas80
are based on the mind, the will, and conceptual consciousness
along with their habit-energy. It is the mind, the will, and
conceptual consciousness and their habit-energy that nourishes
the differentiation of good and bad by fools. Mahamati,
cultivating the bliss and absorption of samadhi and the bliss of
whatever is present, this is what is called good and undefiled by
the wise.
“Mahamati, what is good or bad refers to the eight forms of
consciousness. And what are the eight? They include the
tathagata-garbha—known as the repository consciousness—the
will, conceptual consciousness, and the five forms of sensory
consciousness. These are not taught by followers of other paths.
Mahamati, the five forms of sensory consciousness together with

the mind, the will, and conceptual consciousness give rise to the
development and destruction of good and bad characteristics
and a body that continues without being destroyed. But while
these arise and cease, people are unaware that they are
perceptions of their own minds. And as one form of
consciousness ceases, others arise, differentiate, and grasp
shapes and forms. And as conceptual consciousness and the five
forms of sensory consciousness arise in correspondence with
one another, they last but a moment. Hence, they are called
momentary.
“Mahamati,
what
is
momentary
is
the
repository
consciousness of the tathagata-garbha. But while the habit-
energy of consciousness that arises together with the will is
momentary, its undefiled habit-energy is not momentary. This is
not something of which foolish people are aware because they
are attached to the doctrine of momentariness. Unaware that the
momentariness of everything is not momentary, they apply their
views of annihilation to the destruction of uncreated dharmas as
well.81
“Mahamati, the seven forms of consciousness82 do not
transmigrate. Nor do they experience pleasure or pain. Nor are
they the cause of nirvana. Mahamati, it is the tathagata-garbha
that experiences pleasure and pain and that arises and ceases in
conjunction with causes. Intoxicated with the four states of
affliction and that of fundamental ignorance,83 foolish people
remain unaware that their view of momentariness is the mind
under the influence of differentiation.
“Moreover, Mahamati, just as gold and diamonds and the
relics of buddhas possess a unique nature, which is
indestructible, if realization were momentary, Mahamati, the wise

would not be wise. But the wise are, indeed, wise. Even in the
course of kalpas, the amount of gold or diamonds does not
diminish. Why then do foolish people not understand the deeper
meaning of my words and think that everything, whether internal
or external, is momentary?”

LXXXVII84
1. “Fools imagine created things85 / as empty,
impermanent, and momentary / momentariness they
imagine / as a river, a lamp, or a seed
2. Afflictions end in a moment / they are still and
uncreated / nothing arises at all / this is what momentary
means
3. Things arising then ceasing / this isn’t what I teach
fools / an unbroken continuous existence / this is the result
of distinctions
4. Ignorance is the cause / this is where thoughts
begin / but before any forms appear / where are they in
between86
5. Cessation is unceasing / one thought follows
another / before they focus on form / on what do they
depend to arise
6. Because this arises from that / arising from what
isn’t real / how could something be momentary / if it was
never complete
7. The samadhis of practitioners / the relics
ofbuddhas and diamonds / celestial palaces of light and
music87 / the world cannot destroy

8. The abiding truths that are attained / the perfect
knowledge of a tathagata / the equalities realized by a
monk88 / how can these be momentary
9. Illusions such as gandharvan cities / these too are
not momentary / but regarding unreal forms / real is how
they are seen.”89

LXXXVIII90
Mahamati, once more asked the Buddha, “Bhagavan,
according to what the Bhagavan has said, by carrying out the six
paramitas one attains enlightenment, but which six?”91
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are three different kinds
of paramitas:92 mundane, metaphysical, and transcendent.
Mahamati, as for the mundane paramitas, because those who
are attached to a self and what belongs to a self cling to
dualities, they carry out the paramita of charity in order to enjoy
the form, sound, smell, taste, and touch of other states of
existence. And they do the same in regard to morality,
forbearance, vigor, meditation, and wisdom for the sake of
worldly powers or rebirth in the heavens of Brahma93
“Mahamati, as for the metaphysical paramitas, because
shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas become attached to nirvana,
they practice the six paramitas in order to enjoy the bliss of
nirvana for themselves.
“Mahamati, as for the transcendent paramitas, because those
who realize that the projections to which they are attached are
nothing but perceptions of their own mind and that their own
mind is thereby divided, they do not give rise to projections or
become attached to other states of existence.
“Not letting their mind become attached to material

appearances, they engage in the transcendent practice of the
paramita of charity for the happiness of all beings. Not giving
rise to restrictions regarding the projection of objective
conditions, this is the paramita of morality. Not giving rise to the
projection of patience while knowing what grasps and what is
grasped, this is the paramita of forbearance. Not giving rise to
the projection of practice while practicing with zeal during the
three periods of the night, this is the paramita of vigor. Not
becoming attached to the nirvana of shravakas when projections
cease, this is the paramita of meditation. And examining the
nonexistence of the projections of one’s mind with insight
without falling into dualities, and transforming one’s karmic body
into an indestructible one,94 and reaching the realm of the
personal realization of buddha knowledge, this is the paramita of
wisdom.”

LXXXIX95
Mahamati once more asked the Buddha, “The Bhagavan
assures arhats they will attain unexcelled, perfect enlightenment
no different from bodhisattvas. But why then say that those
beings who attain buddhahood are those who do not experience
the dharma of nirvana?96 And why do you say that from the time
buddhas first attain enlightenment until the time they enter
nirvana, they do not speak or respond with a single word, or
that because tathagatas are always in samadhi, they don’t reason
or reflect, while the work of buddhas is performed by apparition
buddhas, or that their consciousness is momentary and subject
to destruction or that they are always accompanied and
protected by Vajrapani?97 And why do you not point out the
ultimate beginning?98 And how is it that the Tathagata attains the
knowledge of all things yet does not escape such afflictions as
karmic retribution in the form of demons and demonic deeds99
or karmic obstructions in the guise of Cinca Manavika, or
Sundari,100 or an empty begging bowl?”101
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Listen carefully and ponder it
well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati replied, “Wonderful, Bhagavan. May we be so
instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “I speak of complete nirvana to

attract those who would engage in bodhisattva practices. And to
those in this and other worlds who cultivate bodhisattva
practices but who delight in the nirvana of the shravaka path, in
order to encourage them to abandon the shravaka path and turn
toward the Mahayana, apparition buddhas give these shravakas
assurances, not dharmata buddhas.102 Therefore, Mahamati, the
assurances given to shravakas and bodhisattvas do not differ.
“Mahamati, what doesn’t differ is the taste of liberation when
shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas or buddhas and tathagatas get
rid of the obstruction of passion, not when they get rid of the
obstruction of knowledge. Mahamati, the obstruction of
knowledge is purified when they see that dharmas have no self.
The obstruction of passion is removed prior to this when they
become accustomed to seeing that persons have no self. It is
when the seventh consciousness ceases103 that they are
liberated from the obstruction of dharmas. And it is when the
habit-energy of the repository consciousness ceases104 that their
purification is complete.
“Because I rely on an underlying reality,105 past and future do
not exist. And because my original vow has no limit, the
Tathagata speaks the Dharma without reasoning or reflecting.
And because my thoughts have been transformed by correct
knowledge and are not delusions, I do not reason or reflect.
And because I have cut off the habit-energy from the four states
and fundamental ignorance,106 I have eliminated the two
afflictions,107 transcended the two types of death, realized the
two kinds of no-self, and removed the two obstructions.
“Mahamati, because the mind, the will, conceptual
consciousness, visual consciousness, and the rest are all based
on momentary habit-energy, they are devoid of good, non-

karmic qualities that do not result in samsara. Mahamati, the
tathagata-garbha is the cause of samsara and nirvana, of joy and
suffering. But because their minds are confused by emptiness,
this is something foolish people cannot fathom.
“Mahamati, those who are accompanied and protected by
Vajrapani are apparition buddhas, not real tathagatas.
Mahamati, real tathagatas are beyond the range of the senses.
The range of the senses of shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, and
followers of other paths is limited. Also, because they dwell in
the bliss of whatever is present and the knowledge and
forbearance of realization, they are not the ones protected by
Vajrapani.108
“Apparition buddhas are not created by karma. Apparition
buddhas are not buddhas. But neither are they different from
buddhas. When they speak the Dharma, they rely on such man-
made objects as pottery wheels, but they do not speak about
their own understanding of the realm of personal realization.109
“Moreover, Mahamati, fools give rise to views of annihilation
based on the cessation of the seven forms of consciousness.110
And they give rise to views of permanence because they do not
understand the repository consciousness. It is because of their
own projections that they do not understand the ultimate
beginning. It is when their projections cease that liberation
occurs. And it is when the habit-energy of fundamental
ignorance and the four states of affliction stop that all faults
stop.”
1. “The three paths are not paths / the tathagatas are
not destroyed / the assurances given by buddhas / are for

getting free of faults and vices
2. With the knowledge of different realizations / and
nirvana that leaves no trace / I attract those of lesser
wisdom / and thus conceal my teaching111
3. The knowledge taught by buddhas / the paths to
which they point / none of these are paths / nor are they
nirvana
4. Desire, form, existence, and views / on these four
states of which I speak112 / and to which conceptual
consciousness gives birth / the will and repository
consciousness dwell
5. The will and sensory consciousness / nihilists say
are impermanent / others see them as nirvana / saying they
last forever.”

XC113
Mahamati then asked in verse:
1. “Regarding bodhisattvas / whose minds are set on
buddhahood / should they consume / wine or meat or
onions114
2. Why do fools desire / the stench, the filth, the
infamy / why would anyone eat / the favorite food of
wolves and tigers
3. Does eating meat give rise to sin / does not eating
meat mean blessing / please explain the sin and blessing / of
eating meat or not.”
After Mahamati had asked in verse, he once more addressed
the Buddha, “Bhagavan, please explain for us the vice and virtue
of eating and not eating meat. For when I and other
bodhisattvas, both now and in the future, explain the Dharma to
beings who enjoy eating meat, we will be trying to arouse their
compassion toward others. For once their compassion is
aroused, whatever stage they are at will be purer and clearer,
and they will attain supreme enlightenment sooner. Even those
resting in the stages of shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas will
quickly attain supreme enlightenment.
“Followers of other paths who maintain mistaken doctrines
and who are attached to mistaken views of annihilation and

eternity have commandments that prohibit eating meat. Can
those who would protect the true teaching of the tathagatas in
the world do any better while eating meat?”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “Excellent, most excellent. Listen
and ponder it well, and I will tell you.”
Mahamati said, “May we be so instructed.”
The Buddha told Mahamati, “There are countless reasons
why you should not eat meat. But I will summarize them for you.
Because all beings have at some time been reborn as family
members, out of your feelings for them, you shouldn’t eat meat.
Because butchers indiscriminately sell the flesh of donkeys and
camels, foxes and dogs, cattle and horses and humans115 along
with that of other animals, 116 you shouldn’t eat meat. And you
shouldn’t eat meat because animals are raised on impurities.
And you shouldn’t eat meat because beings become afraid when
they smell its odor, like when a dog snarls in anger and fear at
the sight of a chandala or domba.117
“Also, you shouldn’t eat meat because it prevents
practitioners from giving rise to compassionate thoughts. You
shouldn’t eat meat because those fools who are fond of its
stench, its filth, and its impurity are maligned. You shouldn’t eat
meat because it makes spells and incantations ineffective. You
shouldn’t eat meat because those who kill living creatures
become so attached to its taste, they think about it whenever
they see them. You shouldn’t eat meat because those who eat
meat are abandoned by the gods. You shouldn’t eat meat
because it makes your breath stink. You shouldn’t eat meat
because it causes nightmares. You shouldn’t eat meat because
the tigers and wolves in the the forest and the wilderness can
smell it. You shouldn’t eat meat because it results in a lack of

restraint regarding food and drink. You shouldn’t eat meat
because it keeps practitioners from giving rise to aversion. You
shouldn’t eat meat because I have often said that when you eat
or drink, you should imagine you are consuming the flesh of your
children or swallowing medicine.118 I would never approve the
eating of meat.
“Further, Mahamati, in the past there was a king named
Simhasaudasa who ate all kinds of meat.119 But when he started
eating human flesh, his ministers and subjects would not accept
it. They conspired to overthrow him, and they put an end to his
reign. Such are the ills of eating meat. Hence, you should not eat
meat.
“Further, Mahamati, those who kill do so for profit. They kill
creatures and sell them in the marketplace, where ignorant meat-
eating people use the net of money to catch their meat. Among
those who take the lives of others, some use money, and some
use hooks and nets to catch creatures that move through the air
or in the water or across the land. They kill all sorts of creatures
and sell them in the marketplace for profit. Mahamati, when it
comes to fish or meat, there is no such thing as ‘not requesting,
seeking, or thinking about it.’120 For this reason, you should not
eat meat.
“Mahamati, on some occasions I have proscribed eating five
kinds of meat and at other times ten kinds. Today, in this sutra, I
am getting rid of practices that allow certain kinds at certain
times in favor of none whatsoever. Mahamati, the Tathagata, the
Arhat, the Fully Enlightened One has never eaten anything much
less taught others to eat fish or meat. Because of my past acts of
great compassion, I look on all beings as I would a child. And
why would I approve eating the flesh of children?”

The Buddha than repeated this in verse:
1. “Because it was a family member / or because it is
covered with filth / or it was raised on impurities / or its
smell gives rise to fear
2. From meat and from onions / from leeks and from
garlic / from indulging in alcohol / practitioners keep their
distance
3. They also avoid sesame oil122 / as well as beds of
thorns123 / because there are tiny insects / cowering in fear
inside
4. As food and drink promote indulgence / and
indulgence stimulates feelings / and from feelings come
desires / you should therefore eat no meat
5. As eating meat produces desires / and desires
stupefy the mind / forever drunk on love and desire / from
birth and death you won’t escape
6. Killing creatures for profit / or catching your meat
with money / both of these are evil paths / leading to the
hell of lamentation124
7. As for ‘not requesting, seeking, or thinking about
it’125 / there is no thrice-pure meat / this isn’t free of karma
/ therefore you should eat no meat
8. Those who are practitioners / therefore keep their
distance / buddhas of the ten directions / all voice their
disapproval
9. Taking turns eating each other / reborn among
wolves or tigers / amid detestable stench and filth /
wherever they are born they are fools
10. Usually they’re born as chandalas126 / as dombas

or as hunters / or they’re born among meat-eating demons
/ rakshasas or wild cats127
11. In the Hastikakshya and the Mahamegha / in
the Angulimaliya as well128 / and here in the
Lankavatara / I proscribe all eating of meat
12. Buddhas and bodhisattvas / even shravakas
denounce it / eating meat without shame / living life after life
in ignorance
13. And those who admit their offense129 / who have
already stopped eating meat / blinded by their projections /
they are reborn in carnivorous worlds
14. Just as excessive desire / keeps you from getting
free / alcohol, meat, onions, and garlic / block the path to
buddhahood
15. Beings in some future age / might stupidly say
about meat / ‘it’ pure and isn’t wrong / the buddhas said
we could eat it’
16. Imagine you’re swallowing medicine / or eating
the flesh of a child / be content and practice aversion / beg
for your food instead
17. Even those with compassionate hearts / I tell to
practice aversion / such beasts as tigers or wolves / might
yet become their companions
18. Those who eat blood-covered flesh / terrify other
beings / therefore those who practice / out of compassion
should not eat meat
19. It doesn’t foster compassion or wisdom / it
prevents your true liberation / it conflicts with the ways of
the wise / therefore you should not eat meat
20. Rebirth as a Brahman / in a place of practice / in

a wise or noble family / this comes from not eating meat.”
1 Chapter Four. Just a few final questions as Mahamati and the
Buddha move on to the nature of buddhahood and the end of
the bodhisattva path. I have combined Suzuki’s chapters Four
through Nine into this one chapter but have retained his section
numbering.
2 Section LXXX. This section focuses on the differences
between how bodhisattvas and followers of other paths handle
samadhi and the bliss of samadhi during the final stages of the
path. While followers of other paths see the cessation of
sensation and perception as their final goal, bodhisattvas see it
as just another illusion and continue in their practice of liberating
all beings. Then, too, bodhisattvas see all stages as illusions.
3 The Sanskrit is nirodha-samapatti. This samadhi in which
sensation and perception cease is characteristic of the sixth stage
of the bodhisattva path. It is also part of the Hinayana path,
whose practitioners interpret this as nirvana. However,
Mahayana practitioners see it as transitional and neither allow
themselves to be seduced by its bliss, nor do they forsake its
bliss for the nothingness of nirvana, nor do they cease giving rise
to thoughts. For them, thoughts are not thoughts.
4 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all have variations
of “not fall prey to” or “not be confused by” the bliss of this
samadhi. I’ve followed Gunabhadra. Based on what follows in
this section, Gunabhadra’s translation is clearly the correct
interpretation here.
5 At this stage they eliminate all views of the three realms.
6 Formless meditations are practiced during the first five stages
but only begin to exceed those based on form at the sixth stage.
By the seventh stage all meditations are said to be formless.

7 What is good is nirvana or what leads to nirvana, what is bad
is samsara or what leads to samsara.
8 Gunabhadra alone has “seventh,” all other versions have
“sixth.” I have inverted the order of this sentence and the next.
9 Both here and in Section LXXXII, Gunabhadra has chueh (to
be aware/to know), instead of chueh-che (aware ones;
buddhas). Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all have
“aware ones/buddhas.” Since elsewhere in the sutra, even
Gunabhadra has the buddhas supporting bodhisattvas during
samadhi, Gunabhadra’s translation needs amending here.
10 The four pratisamvid include powers regarding teaching,
meaning, expression, and eloquence.
11 The Sanskrit is vivikta-dharma. Suzuki reads this quite
differently as “absolute solitude.”
12 These ten vows, made at the beginning of the path, include
speaking the Dharma in being realms without limit, world realms
without limit, space realms without limit, dharma realms without
limit, nirvana realms without limit, etc.
13 In this metaphor, this shore is samsara, the other shore is
nirvana, and the river is that of the ever-flowing habit-energy that
arises from projections.
14 Again, the Sanskrit is vivikta-dharma. Bodhiruchi adds a
paragraph here in which Mahamati asks about the seeming
contradiction of shravakas and pratye-kas reaching the eighth
stage but not yet possessing insights characteristic of the first
stage, let alone the seventh. The Buddha tells him there are two
kinds of such practitioners, the ordinary shravakas and those
who have previously practiced the bodhisattva path but who
have fallen back into the Hinayana path.
15 As the Buddha himself states in the next verse, these refer to

the seventh and eighth stages, respectively.
16 The referent of “this abode” is the ninth stage. See also the
next verse.
17 The “two stages” are the ninth and tenth stages, the tenth of
which is “supreme.” Thus, the conception of the bodhisattva
path in the Lanka is one of ten stages, in which the tathagata
stage is the tenth. There is no eleventh stage.
18 Buddhas experience enlightenment in the highest heaven in
the realm of form.
19 The stage free from projections is the eighth stage. Then
again, as the sequence of stages is itself a projection, no stage
would be the only stage free from projections.
20 Section LXXXI. Previously in Section LXXIX, the Buddha
dismissed the seven kinds of impermanence advanced by other
paths and said the teaching of the tathagatas is neither permanent
nor impermanent. Here, Mahamati wonders if this also applies
to a tathagata’s body—in or out of nirvana. The question
concerns a buddha’s dharma body, not a buddha’s apparition or
reward bodies. The Buddha reminds Mahamati that such
assertions are inherently flawed, as they are based on a duality
that is imaginary and that does not apply to tathagatas or to the
knowledge of tathagatas.
21 If permanent, tathagatas would be equivalent to a creator (or
first cause). If impermanent, then they would cease to exist when
their bodies ceased to exist. Also, if they are not the creator but
the created, they would be like anything else created, as would
their knowledge and teaching. Finally, they would be like
everything else, and everything else would be like them.
22 The Sanskrit is karana.
23 Followers of other paths also held that what was permanent

or impermanent was caused or created. But if tathagatas were
uncaused, would they not be the same as space, which was also
held to be uncaused? Also, if the tathagatas were uncaused, they
would not require a short, much less a long, course of practice
to reach such attainment.
24 Previously, the Buddha said “non-arising is another name for
the Tathagata.” Followers of other paths held that what does not
arise is permanent because by not arising it would not be subject
to ceasing. But this would be equivalent to an imaginary
fabrication.
25 This permanence is true permanence and not false
permanence. The Dharma doesn’t change whether it is realized
or not, whether it is manifest or not, whether it is taught or not.
What is realized is permanent, and what realizes is permanent.
26 This is the Sanskrit term for “wisdom.” Its use in this sutra is
rather rare, as the Lankavatara focuses on jnana, or
“knowledge.” Prajna literally means “before-knowledge.”
27 I’ve followed Shikshananda for this verse, which
Gunabhadra omits.
28 As when the seven kinds of impermanence are applied to
nirvana.
29 Section LXXXII. The Buddha explains the relationship, if it
can be called that, between the tathagata-garbha and the alaya-
vijnana, whereby the former is the cause of the latter but
whereby the latter is an illusion. Readers should also refer to the
Buddha’s earlier description of the tathagata-garbha as an
intrinsically pure jewel wrapped in the rags of the skandhas and
without a self (Section XXVIII).
30 This term refers to a sensory power, a sensory domain, and
the form of sensory consciousness that arises when these two

meet.
31 This refers to the fundamental condition of ignorance from
which all forms of ignorance arises. The Sanskrit is avidya-
vasa-bhumi.
32 The four dhyana (meditative) heavens are regions in the
realm of form, where enlightenment occurs. The fourth dhyana
heaven is where thought ceases.
33 This refers to the Four Noble Truths, the fourth of which is
the Eightfold Path of Liberation.
34 They have seen through the self in persons but not the self in
dharmas.
35 They cease to exist because they are products of the
repository consciousness, which has been replaced by or
transformed into the tathagata-garbha.
36 This name (acala: unshakeable) refers to the eighth stage of
the bodhisattva path.
37 These are enumerated in the Avatamsaka Sutra, where they
constitute the subject of Chapter 27 (of the forty-chapter
version): universal light, subtle light, travel to all buddhalands,
purification of the mind, knowledge of the past, light of wisdom,
knowledge of adornments, differentiation of beings, the Dharma
Realm, and unimpeded teaching.
38 The Sanskrit term bhuta-koti means “limit/boundary of
reality,” and here all three Chinese translations render it shih-chi
(reality-boundary). Its range of reference is similar to that of
“nirvana,” but without the sense of annihilation. For more on this
term, and its counterpart purva-koti (ultimate beginning), see
Robert Sharf’s Coming to Terms with Chinese Buddhism,
pages 230-233.
39 This is a conception of spiritual lineages found in

Prajnaparamita literature. It begins with the “dry-wisdom” stage
and ends with the pratyeka-buddha, bodhisattva, and buddha
stages.
40 When consciousness is transformed into knowledge, its name
is no longer repository consciousness but womb of buddhas
(tathagata-garbha).
41 If there were no repository consciousness, there would be no
tathagata-garbha and, thus, no liberation or path leading to
liberation.
42 The Indian gooseberry, or Phyllanthus emblica, the fruit of
which is about one inch in diameter.
43 She was the daughter of King Prasenajit and Queen Mallika
of Kosala. In a sutra named after her, she explains that the
tathagata-garbha has two states: empty and not empty. This
short text was translated by Gunabhadra in 436. (cf. Taisho
Tripitaka, volume 12)
44 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda add: “It is not for shravakas
and the followers of other paths who are attached to words.”
45 As for the two kinds of grasping, earlier in this section, the
Buddha lists the grasping of individual and shared
characteristics. However, near the end of the next section, he
lists the grasping of the self and what belongs to the self, of
subject and object.
46 Section LXXXIII. The Buddha explains the all-inclusive
nature of the five dharmas, which was a category of analysis and
understanding used by the Yogacara, whereby name and
appearance are the objects of projection or imagination (and
thus false knowledge) and suchness is the object of correct
knowledge.
47 The distinguishing characteristics of this series of categories

consist in the characteristics of the first member of the series,
namely, the five dharmas.
48 The Sanskrit is drshta-dharma-sukha-vihara. This
meditation is associated with the realm of form and not the realm
of desire.
49 Appearance and name are so inextricably linked that to talk
about one is to talk about the other.
50 Gunabhadra omits the last clause, which is present in
Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda and seems called for here.
51 This is the tenth and final stage of the bodhisattva path. In the
Lankavatara, it is also called the tathagata stage.
52 Vows to liberate beings regardless of the extent of the realms
of beings, worlds, space, emptiness, reality, nirvana, etc. See my
note in Section LXVIII.
53 The Sanskrit is citta-caitta-kalapa. The same phrase also
occurs in the next section, as well as in numerous other places in
the sutra. It refers to the mind in general as well as to any and all
varieties of its states and functions.
54 Only Gunabhadra lists all eight.
55 As elsewhere in the Lankavatara, negating something does
not necessarily result in nothing.
56 Section LXXXIV. This is a continuation of the previous
section and a restatement of the five dharmas as containing all
the teachings of the buddhas. At heart, it also comes down to
transforming projection, which is responsible for names and
appearances, into non-projection, on which correct knowledge
and suchness are based. And by correct knowledge is meant the
knowledge known to buddhas that is realized for oneself and
that cannot be taught.
57 The different order for the last two items is supported by all

editions. Commentators say that correct knowledge followed by
suchness, as in the previous section, reflects a systematic
approach to the five dharmas, while suchness followed by
correct knowledge, as in this section, reflects an experiential
approach.
58 The Sanskrit for this series is: tattva, bhuta, nishcaya,
nishtha, prakrti, svabhava, anupalabdhi. Gunabhadra’s
translation, which I have followed, does not include prakrti
(fundamental).
59 Section LXXXV. The last section ended with suchness,
which is the realm of a buddha’s dharma body. In this section,
the Buddha uses the sands of the Ganges as a multipurpose
metaphor to demonstrate such a body’s virtues.
60 Namely, impermanence.
61 This is meant to encourage people to believe that becoming a
buddha is something anyone can do. The udumbara is a flower
(some say it is a blue lotus) that blooms once every three
thousand years.
62 This is meant to encourage people to try to do what is
difficult.
63 The purpose of such a statement seems to be twofold. First,
people should not become attached to the idea of a buddha
because buddhas do not exist. Second, they are, in fact, now
seeing an udumbara flower and should take advantage of this
rarest of opportunities.
64 The Sanskrit for “to establish personal understanding” is sva-
naya pratyav-asthana . See also Section LXIII, where
siddhanta-naya is used with basically the same meaning,
referring to “the personal realization” of buddha knowledge.
Such understanding cannot be established for others, it can only

be realized for oneself
65 Even though the buddhas are beyond comparison, the sand
of the Ganges still serves to exemplify certain qualities of the
buddhas, namely the seven that follow.
66 Every universe goes through four stages: creation, stasis,
destruction (by fire), and emptiness. Then it begins again.
67 In this hypothetical situation, these fools would have to be “in
other worlds” because this world would have been burned up.
68 This statement could be based on witnessing volcanoes
spewing lava. But it also follows from the conception of a
material world as a cycle of elements, whereby one gives rise to
the other.
69 The intent is to counter those who think the end of the fires of
ignorance also means an end of the dharma body.
70 Because buddhas are no longer subject to birth and death,
they cannot become anything other than what they are.
71 The Buddha’s dharma body is not a physical body but a
wisdom body. It does not decrease or increase in size when
others become enlightened.
72 The Sanskrit, dharma-dhatu (dharma realm), is a term with
multiple meanings, but here it refers simply to the world of
beings in which the Dharma is taught.
73 Nirvana is often mistaken as leaving this world, the end of the
cycle of birth and death. But as interpreted by the Mahayana, it
is not a departure but a transformation. Nothing comes, nothing
goes. The Sanskrit for “go” is gata. Hence, tatha-gata (thus-
go) and that-agata (thus-not go) are common puns.
74 The question implies that liberation somehow exists outside
of birth and death. In this and the above paragraph, “the ultimate
beginning (purva-koti) of samsara” is also another name and

another view of nirvana.
75 Gunabhadra translates purva-koti in Mahamati’s question as
pen-chi (boundary /limit of the beginning), but in his answer, he
translates it as wu-pien (without limit/boundary). Both are
standard readings of this term, which refers to what came before
samsara, before life and death, while bhuta-koti (ultimate
reality) refers to what comes after nirvana. Essentially, they refer
to the same thing. See Section LXXXII and my note thereto.
76 Gunabhadra expands this into six lines. I’ve followed
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit.
77 Gunabhadra has “this is a buddha’s enlightenment” for the
last line, which I’ve transposed to the first line. Otherwise, I’ve
followed Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit for this
verse. The Buddha is referring to the tathagata-garbha here,
which is the alaya-vijnana transformed and thus “unpolluted.”
The Buddha has more to say about this relationship between the
tathagata-garbha and the alaya-vijnana in the next section.
78 Section LXXXVI. Mahamati continues his inquiry into the
nature of buddhas. If all dharmas are transient, would this not
also include those dharmas upon which buddhahood is based?
And if so, are buddhas themselves not also momentary? The
Buddha’s teaching in this and other Mahayana sutras is that
dharmas are not momentary because they do not exist in the first
place. But this is only understood by someone at the eighth stage
of the bodhisattva path, someone who has attained the
forbearance of non-arising.
79 The Sanskrit is kshana-bhanga (momentary-breakable).
Impermanence is among the earliest teachings of the Buddha.
80 The five skandhas (form, sensation, perception, memory, and
consciousness) are sometimes called “grasping” because they

represent the domains in which a self is established, or at least
conjured.
81 Uncreated, or unconditioned, dharmas include space,
cessation, and nirvana.
82 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all have “five
forms of sensory consciousness.” Either version would be
correct here, as it is only the eighth form of consciousness that
“transmigrates,” which it does in the form of fundamental
ignorance.
83 These refer to the five states of affliction, four of which are
lumped together here: views, attachments to desire, attachments
to form, attachments to formlessness, and fundamental
ignorance, which is separated from the rest here, as it is said to
be responsible for “transmigration.”
84 Section LXXXVII. This section does not so much explain
the previous section as it does its last sentence. The deeper
meaning of the Buddha’s teaching of momentariness is no
momentariness. The order of this and the next section was
apparently confused at an early date, as Gunabhadra,
Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all have the next
section before this one. However, such an arrangement is clearly
mistaken, and I have reverted to what I assume was the original
order. There are also quite a few lines in this section that are
handled differently by Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the
Sanskrit. I have only indicated the more significant differences.
85 “Created things” refer to samskrita dharmas, as opposed to
the asamskrita (uncreated) dharmas of space, cessation, and
nirvana.
86 This verse, and also the last two lines of the previous verse,
outline the view of “transmigration” as the rebirth of ignorance.

87 Characteristic of the third (Abhasvara) heaven in the second
meditation in the realm of form.
88 Referring to the view that affliction is enlightenment, samsara
is nirvana.
89 For the last two lines, Bodhiruchi has: “the forms that are
seen are devoid of the four elements / how can the four elements
create them?” Shikshananda has: “the elements have no real
existence / why say they can create them?” Suzuki translates the
Sanskrit: “realities are characterized with unreality / how can
they be causal agencies?”
90 Section LXXXVIII. As this sutra approaches its conclusion,
the practices known as the six paramitas are also reviewed in
the light of its unique teaching. The six paramitas include charity,
morality, forbearance, vigor, meditation, and wisdom. The word
paramita is often interpreted as “the means for reaching the
other shore,” with this shore being that of samsara and the other
shore being nirvana.
91 Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda add: “And how are they
carried out?”
92 One kind for ordinary people, one kind for shravakas and
pratyeka-buddhas, and one kind for bodhisattvas.
93 Brahma was regarded as the supreme being and creator of
the universe by Brahmans, and his heavens (as many as eighteen
according to some accounts) make up what Buddhists call the
realm of form.
94 Every translation handles this clause differently. As
elsewhere, I’ve followed Gunabhadra, who has a buddha’s
dharma body in mind.
95 Section LXXXIX. Mahamati poses a final series of questions
concerning the nature of buddhas and buddhahood. Much like

those concerning the metaphor of the sand of the Ganges, the
Buddha’s answers are meant to reveal the deeper meaning
concerning what on the surface appear to be contradictions.
96 This sentence follows from the previous one and asks how is
it that those who seek nirvana (arhats) are assured of
buddhahood. I have followed Shikshananda in this case, as the
wording is unclear in Gunabhadra, while Bodhiruchi has
buddhas not entering nirvana rather than arhats not entering
nirvana. Suzuki has something quite different: “How can all
beings attain Tathagatahood without realizing the truths of
Parinirvana?”
97 Vajrapani is the name of one of the three protective deities of
every buddha. As his name indicates, he is usually depicted
wielding a vajra, or thunderbolt.
98 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit all have
variations of “why say the ultimate beginning is not knowable yet
speak of entering nirvana.” In what follows, the Buddha says the
ultimate beginning cannot be known because the past and future
are illusions and because it is merely another fabrication.
99 This refers to the attempt by Mara and his demonic host to
distract Shakyamuni prior to his attainment of Enlightenment.
100 Cinca Manavika accused the Buddha of being the father of
her unborn child, which turned out to be nothing but rags tied
around her stomach. Sundari also made false accusations against
the Buddha. Some texts say for sexual impropriety, others say
that she killed her own daughter, buried the body where the
Buddha was staying, and accused the Buddha of the murder.
101 This refers to an occasion when the residents of a village
where the Buddha was begging refused to give him any food.
102 The term “dharmata buddha,” as the Buddha says later in

this section, refers to a “real buddha,” or what would eventually
be called a buddha’s “dharma body.”
103 The seventh consciousness is self-consciousness.
104 It is only the habit-energy of repository consciousness that
ceases, not the eighth consciousness itself, which, once purified,
is referred to as the tathagatagarbha, the womb of buddhas, and
thus the source of buddha knowledge.
105 The Sanskrit for this expression is purva-dharma-sthitita.
106 As it did earlier in this chapter, these refer to the five states
of affliction: wrong views, attachments to desire, attachments to
form, attachments to formlessness, and fundamental ignorance.
107 There are different lists for the two afflictions (kleshas).
Most likely meant are afflictions arising from projection and
those inherent in the eight forms of consciousness.
108 Demons cannot disturb, nor Vajrapani protect, those who
understand what is real.
109 They necessarily limit their explanations of the Dharma to
things people can see, using them as metaphors for what they
cannot see. But they do not speak of their own understanding
because they are apparitions and have no experience or
realization of their own.
110 Bodhiruchi, Shikshananda, and the Sanskrit have “six forms
of consciousness.” Obviously, there developed a difference of
opinion as to whether or not the will, or self-consciousness,
ceases along with conceptual and sensory consciousness at
death. In the Lankavatara, the Buddha says only the repository
consciousness continues into the next life. Hence, Gunabhadra’s
version alone is consistent with the text.
111 The Sanskrit has samdhya-bhashya (twilight teaching),
which is a mistake for samdha-bhasya (esoteric teaching).

Gunabhadra and Bodhiruchi have yin-fu (covered), while
Shikshananda has mi-yi (secret). The meaning of this is a
subject of much debate. Which is the real teaching? Judging
from what the Buddha says in the following verses as well as
elsewhere in this sutra, he is concerned that if he presented his
“real” teaching to such people, it would either be misunderstood
or it would terrify them. Hence, he keeps it covered up and
presents something more attractive. Then again, at the end of
Section LXXXVI, he asks why people don’t understand the
“deeper meaning” of his words.
112 The four states of affliction include views and attachments in
the realms of desire, form, and formlessness. They are referred
to as the five states when they include fundamental ignorance.
113 Section XC. This section on cultivating a vegetarian diet
follows from the foregoing and is not a haphazard addition. It is
important to know how to live in this world of illusions. And the
practice of avoiding the eating of meat became part of the
bodhisattva path advocated by Mahayana Buddhism. Thus,
some commentators also view this section as a critique of the
practices of Hinayana Buddhists, namely, the shravakas and
pratyeka-buddhas, who excused their eating of meat by claiming
it was not proscribed by the precepts. Bodhiruchi’s translation
of the prose part of this section is seven times as long, while
Shikshananda’s is three times as long, suggesting that this issue
was of more than passing concern.
114 Wine and onions are not mentioned again in the prose
section. I imagine this is because they were already listed among
the things prohibited by the precepts that lay and monastic
Buddhists agreed to abide by. Eating meat, however, was not
prohibited—although killing was. The reason for the proscription

regarding onions and their kin was that they were considered
aphrodisiacs. To this first verse, Gunabhadra adds two lines:
“May the Peerless One / pity us with an explanation.” I’ve
followed Bodhiruchi and Shikshananda, neither of whom
includes this.
115 Most likely referring to the unburied corpses of the poor.
116 You never know when you’re eating a human.
117 Chandalas were members of a despised caste associated
with the disposal of corpses. Dombas were also outcastes and
associated with the cremation of corpses.
118 The Buddha encouraged such associations so that his
followers would eat and drink as little as possible.
119 This story appears in a number of variants in early Indian
texts. Saudasa was the son of Sudasa and a lioness. Hence, he
was called Simha, “the Lion.”
120 It was the contention of some shravakas that as long as they
didn’t request, seek, or think about meat, they could eat it.
121 Shikshananda’s translation of the poems agrees with that of
Gunabhadra, while that of Bodhiruchi sometimes does but often
does not. The Sanskrit includes a number of verses that are not
present in any of the Chinese versions.
122 The proscription in this case concerns the use of sesame oil
as an insecticide.
123 Not only is self-mortification counterproductive to
enlightenment, killing insects in the process cancels any merit
gained from such a practice.
124 This is one of the eight hot hells. The Sanskrit is raurava,
meaning to “lament” or “scream.”
125 This terminology, which also appears in the penultimate
paragraph of the prose section, refers to the series of excuses

some shravakas used for eating meat.
126 Chandalas were one of many despised castes in India.
Among their professions was the disposal of corpses. Dombas
were another despised caste whose professions included the
cremation of corpses.
127 The appearance of rakshasas here is ironic, considering
they were the inhabitants of Lanka. Gunabhadra spreads this out
over six lines.
128 The Angulimaliya Sutra was translated into Chinese by
Gunabhadra, the translator of this sutra, around A.D. 440. Not
to be confused with the Angulimala Sutta of the Pali Canon,
the focus of this Mahayana text is on the tathagatagarbha, or
true self.
129 The wording here refers to the practice of reporting
violations of the precepts as to what one has seen, heard, or
suspected regarding others and oneself. The Buddha’s point is
that such people are attached to their projection of their
newfound purity.

LANKAVATARA MANTRA130
The Buddha then told Mahamati, “Mahamati, in order to protect
this sutra, buddhas of the past, the future, and the present
proclaim the Lankavatara Mantra. You should memorize what
I, too, proclaim. The mantra goes:
Tutte tutte vutte vutte patte patte katte katte amale
amale vimale vimale nime nime hime hime vame vame
kale kale kale kale atte matte vatte tutte jnette sputte
katte katte latte patte dime dime cale cale pace pace
bandhe bandhe ance mance dutare dutare patare
patare arkke arkke sarkke sarkke cakre cakre dime
dime hime hime tu tu tu tu du du du du ru ru ru ru phu
phu phu phu svaha.
“Mahamati, if a good son or daughter memorizes and recites
and explains this dharani to others, no human or non-human or
evil spirit will trouble them. And should misfortune occur, if
someone recites this mantra for them 108 times, the offending
spirit will leave at once.

“Mahamati, I will teach you another mantra:
Padme padmadeve hine hini hine cu cule culu cule
phale phula phule yule ghule yula yule ghule ghula
ghule pale pala pale munce munce munce cchinde
bhinde bhanje marde pramarde dinakare svaha.

“Mahamati, if a good son or daughter memorizes and recites
and explains this dharani to others, no deva or naga or yaksha
or human or non-human or evil spirit will trouble them. I also
teach this mantra to keep rakshasas away.
“Whoever memorizes these mantras, memorizes every word
of the Lankavatara Sutra.”
This marks the end of the Lankavatara Sutra.