The Analects ( Lun Yu )
English translation: James Legge.
Source: www.ctext.org
Edited by Cambridge Chinese Classics www.camcc.org

- Xue Er 1
1-1

The Master said, "Is it not pleasant to learn with a constant perseverance and application? Is it not
delightful to have friends coming from distant quarters? Is he not a man of complete virtue, who
feels no discomposure though men may take no note of him?"
1-2

The philosopher You said, "They are few who, being filial and fraternal, are fond of offending
against their superiors. There have been none, who, not liking to offend against their superiors, have
been fond of stirring up confusion. The superior man bends his attention to what is radical. That
being established, all practical courses naturally grow up. Filial piety and fraternal submission! - are
they not the root of all benevolent actions?"
1-3
The Master said, "Fine words and an insinuating appearance are seldom associated with true
virtue."
1-4
The philosopher Zeng said, "I daily examine myself on three points: whether, in transacting
business for others, I may have been not faithful; whether, in intercourse with friends, I may have
been not sincere; whether I may have not mastered and practiced the instructions of my teacher."
1-5
The Master said, "To rule a country of a thousand chariots, there must be reverent attention to
business, and sincerity; economy in expenditure, and love for men; and the employment of the
people at the proper seasons."
1-6
The Master said, "A youth, when at home, should be filial, and, abroad, respectful to his elders. He
should be earnest and truthful. He should overflow in love to all, and cultivate the friendship of the
good. When he has time and opportunity, after the performance of these things, he should employ
them in polite studies."
1-7

Zi Xia said, "If a man withdraws his mind from the love of beauty, and applies it as sincerely to the
love of the virtuous; if, in serving his parents, he can exert his utmost strength; if, in serving his
prince, he can devote his life; if, in his intercourse with his friends, his words are sincere - although
men say that he has not learned, I will certainly say that he has."
1-8
The Master said, "If the scholar be not grave, he will not call forth any veneration, and his learning
1

will not be solid. Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles. Have no friends not equal to
yourself. When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them."
1-9
The philosopher Zeng said, "Let there be a careful attention to perform the funeral rites to parents,
and let them be followed when long gone with the ceremonies of sacrifice - then the virtue of the
people will resume its proper excellence."
1-10

Zi Qin asked Zi Gong, saying, "When our master comes to any country, he does not fail to learn all
about its government. Does he ask his information? or is it given to him?" Zi Gong said, "Our
master is benign, upright, courteous, temperate, and complaisant and thus he gets his information.
The master's mode of asking information! - is it not different from that of other men?"
1-11
The Master said, "While a man's father is alive, look at the bent of his will; when his father is dead,
look at his conduct. If for three years he does not alter from the way of his father, he may be called
filial."
1-12

The philosopher You said, "In practicing the rules of propriety, a natural ease is to be prized. In the
ways prescribed by the ancient kings, this is the excellent quality, and in things small and great we
follow them. Yet it is not to be observed in all cases. If one, knowing how such ease should be
prized, manifests it, without regulating it by the rules of propriety, this likewise is not to be done."
1-13
The philosopher You said, "When agreements are made according to what is right, what is spoken
can be made good. When respect is shown according to what is proper, one keeps far from shame
and disgrace. When the parties upon whom a man leans are proper persons to be intimate with, he
can make them his guides and masters."
1-14

The Master said, "He who aims to be a man of complete virtue in his food does not seek to gratify
his appetite, nor in his dwelling place does he seek the appliances of ease; he is earnest in what he is
doing, and careful in his speech; he frequents the company of men of principle that he may be
rectified - such a person may be said indeed to love to learn."
1-15

Zi Gong said, "What do you pronounce concerning the poor man who yet does not flatter, and the
rich man who is not proud?" The Master replied, "They will do; but they are not equal to him, who,
though poor, is yet cheerful, and to him, who, though rich, loves the rules of propriety." Zi Gong
replied, "It is said in the Book of Poetry, 'As you cut and then file, as you carve and then polish.' -
The meaning is the same, I apprehend, as that which you have just expressed." The Master said,
"With one like Ci, I can begin to talk about the odes. I told him one point, and he knew its proper
sequence."
2

1-16
The Master said, "I will not be afflicted at men's not knowing me; I will be afflicted that I do not
know men."

- Wei Zheng 2
2-1
The Master said, "He who exercises government by means of his virtue may be compared to the
north polar star, which keeps its place and all the stars turn towards it."
2-2
The Master said, "In the Book of Poetry are three hundred pieces, but the design of them all may be
embraced in one sentence - 'Having no depraved thoughts.'"
2-3
The Master said, "If the people be led by laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by
punishments, they will try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame. If they be led by
virtue, and uniformity sought to be given them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of
shame, and moreover will become good."
2-4

The Master said, "At fifteen, I had my mind bent on learning. At thirty, I stood firm. At forty, I had
no doubts. At fifty, I knew the decrees of Heaven. At sixty, my ear was an obedient organ for the
reception of truth. At seventy, I could follow what my heart desired, without transgressing what was
right."
2-5

Meng Yi asked what filial piety was. The Master said, "It is not being disobedient." Soon after, as
Fan Chi was driving him, the Master told him, saying, "Meng-sun asked me what filial piety was,
and I answered him, - 'not being disobedient.'" Fan Chi said, "What did you mean?" The Master
replied, "That parents, when alive, be served according to propriety; that, when dead, they should be
buried according to propriety; and that they should be sacrificed to according to propriety."
2-6
Meng Wu asked what filial piety was. The Master said, "Parents are anxious lest their children
should be sick."
2-7
Zi You asked what filial piety was. The Master said, "The filial piety nowadays means the support
of one's parents. But dogs and horses likewise are able to do something in the way of support; -
without reverence, what is there to distinguish the one support given from the other?"
2-8
Zi Xia asked what filial piety was. The Master said, "The difficulty is with the countenance. If,
when their elders have any troublesome affairs, the young take the toil of them, and if, when the
young have wine and food, they set them before their elders, is THIS to be considered filial piety?"
3

2-9
The Master said, "I have talked with Hui for a whole day, and he has not made any objection to
anything I said - as if he were stupid. He has retired, and I have examined his conduct when away
from me, and found him able to illustrate my teachings. Hui! - He is not stupid."
2-10
The Master said, "See what a man does. Mark his motives. Examine in what things he rests. How
can a man conceal his character? How can a man conceal his character?"
2-11
The Master said, "If a man keeps cherishing his old knowledge, so as continually to be acquiring
new, he may be a teacher of others."
2-12
The Master said, "The accomplished scholar is not a utensil."
2-13
Zi Gong asked what constituted the superior man. The Master said, "He acts before he speaks, and
afterwards speaks according to his actions."
2-14
The Master said, "The superior man is catholic and not partisan. The mean man is partisan and not
catholic."
2-15
The Master said, "Learning without thought is labor lost; thought without learning is perilous."
2-16
The Master said, "The study of strange doctrines is injurious indeed!"
2-17
The Master said, "You, shall I teach you what knowledge is? When you know a thing, to hold that
you know it; and when you do not know a thing, to allow that you do not know it - this is
knowledge."
2-18

Zi Zhang was learning with a view to official emolument. The Master said, "Hear much and put
aside the points of which you stand in doubt, while you speak cautiously at the same time of the
others - then you will afford few occasions for blame. See much and put aside the things which
seem perilous, while you are cautious at the same time in carrying the others into practice - then you
will have few occasions for repentance. When one gives few occasions for blame in his words, and
few occasions for repentance in his conduct, he is in the way to get emolument."
2-19

The Duke Ai asked, saying, "What should be done in order to secure the submission of the people?"
Confucius replied, "Advance the upright and set aside the crooked, then the people will submit.
Advance the crooked and set aside the upright, then the people will not submit."
4

2-20

Ji Kang asked how to cause the people to reverence their ruler, to be faithful to him, and to go on to
nerve themselves to virtue. The Master said, "Let him preside over them with gravity; then they will
reverence him. Let him be final and kind to all; then they will be faithful to him. Let him advance
the good and teach the incompetent; then they will eagerly seek to be virtuous."
2-21

Some one addressed Confucius, saying, "Sir, why are you not engaged in the government?" The
Master said, "What does the Shu Jing say of filial piety? - 'You are filial, you discharge your
brotherly duties. These qualities are displayed in government.' This then also constitutes the
exercise of government. Why must there be THAT - making one be in the government?"
2-22
The Master said, "I do not know how a man without truthfulness is to get on. How can a large
carriage be made to go without the crossbar for yoking the oxen to, or a small carriage without the
arrangement for yoking the horses?"
2-23

Zi Zhang asked whether the affairs of ten ages after could be known. Confucius said, "The Yin
dynasty followed the regulations of the Xia; wherein it took from or added to them may be known.
The Zhou dynasty has followed the regulations of Yin; wherein it took from or added to them may
be known. Some other may follow the Zhou, but though it should be at the distance of a hundred
ages, its affairs may be known."
2-24
The Master said, "For a man to sacrifice to a spirit which does not belong to him is flattery. To see
what is right and not to do it is want of courage."

- Ba Yi 3
3-1
Confucius said of the head of the Ji family, who had eight rows of pantomimes in his area, "If he
can bear to do this, what may he not bear to do?"
3-2
The three families used the Yong ode, while the vessels were being removed, at the conclusion of
the sacrifice. The Master said, "'Assisting are the princes; the son of heaven looks profound and
grave' - what application can these words have in the hall of the three families?"
3-3
The Master said, "If a man be without the virtues proper to humanity, what has he to do with the
rites of propriety? If a man be without the virtues proper to humanity, what has he to do with
music?"
3-4
Lin Fang asked what was the first thing to be attended to in ceremonies. The Master said, "A great
question indeed! In festive ceremonies, it is better to be sparing than extravagant. In the ceremonies
5

of mourning, it is better that there be deep sorrow than a minute attention to observances."
3-5
The Master said, "The rude tribes of the east and north have their princes, and are not like the States
of our great land which are without them."
3-6

The chief of the Ji family was about to sacrifice to the Tai mountain. The Master said to Ran You,
"Can you not save him from this?" He answered, "I cannot." Confucius said, "Alas! will you say
that the Tai mountain is not so discerning as Lin Fang?"
3-7
The Master said, "The student of virtue has no contentions. If it be said he cannot avoid them, shall
this be in archery? But he bows complaisantly to his competitors; thus he ascends the hall,
descends, and exacts the forfeit of drinking. In his contention, he is still the Junzi"
3-8

Zi Xia asked, saying, "What is the meaning of the passage - 'The pretty dimples of her artful smile!
The well-defined black and white of her eye! The plain ground for the colors?'" The Master said,
"The business of laying on the colors follows (the preparation of) the plain ground." "Ceremonies
then are a subsequent thing?" The Master said, "It is Shang who can bring out my meaning. Now I
can begin to talk about the odes with him."
3-9

The Master said, "I could describe the ceremonies of the Xia dynasty, but Ji cannot sufficiently
attest my words. I could describe the ceremonies of the Yin dynasty, but Song cannot sufficiently
attest my words. (They cannot do so) because of the insufficiency of their records and wise men. If
those were sufficient, I could adduce them in support of my words."
3-10
The Master said, "At the great sacrifice, after the pouring out of the libation, I have no wish to look
on."
3-11
Some one asked the meaning of the great sacrifice. The Master said, "I do not know. He who knew
its meaning would find it as easy to govern the kingdom as to look on this" - pointing to his palm.
3-12
He sacrificed to the dead, as if they were present. He sacrificed to the spirits, as if the spirits were
present. The Master said, "I consider my not being present at the sacrifice, as if I did not sacrifice."
3-13

Wang Sun Jia asked, saying, "What is the meaning of the saying, 'It is better to pay court to the
furnace than to the southwest corner?'" The Master said, "Not so. He who offends against Heaven
has none to whom he can pray."
6

3-14
The Master said, "Zhou had the advantage of viewing the two past dynasties. How complete and
elegant are its regulations! I follow Zhou."
3-15

The Master, when he entered the grand temple, asked about everything. Some one said, "Who say
that the son of the man of Zou knows the rules of propriety! He has entered the grand temple and
asks about everything." The Master heard the remark, and said, "This is a rule of propriety."
3-16
The Master said, "In archery it is not going through the leather which is the principal thing -
because people's strength is not equal. This was the old way."
3-17
Zi Gong wished to do away with the offering of a sheep connected with the inauguration of the first
day of each month. The Master said, "Ci, you love the sheep; I love the ceremony."
3-18
The Master said, "The full observance of the rules of propriety in serving one's prince is accounted
by people to be flattery."
3-19
The duke Ding asked how a prince should employ his ministers, and how ministers should serve
their prince. Confucius replied, "A prince should employ his minister according to according to the
rules of propriety; ministers should serve their prince with faithfulness."
3-20
The Master said, "The Guan Ju is expressive of enjoyment without being licentious, and of grief
without being hurtfully excessive."
3-21

The duke Ai asked Zai Wo about the altars of the spirits of the land. Zai Wo replied, "The Xia
sovereign planted the pine tree about them; the men of the Yin planted the cypress; and the men of
the Zhou planted the chestnut tree, meaning thereby to cause the people to be in awe." When the
Master heard it, he said, "Things that are done, it is needless to speak about; things that have had
their course, it is needless to remonstrate about; things that are past, it is needless to blame."
3-22

The Master said, "Small indeed was the capacity of Guan Zhong!" Some one said, "Was Guan
Zhong parsimonious?" "Guan," was the reply, "had the San Gui, and his officers performed no
double duties; how can he be considered parsimonious?" "Then, did Guan Zhong know the rules of
propriety?" The Master said, "The princes of States have a screen intercepting the view at their
gates. Guan had likewise a screen at his gate. The princes of States on any friendly meeting between
two of them, had a stand on which to place their inverted cups. Guan had also such a stand. If Guan
knew the rules of propriety, who does not know them?"
7

3-23

The Master instructing the Grand music master of Lü said, "How to play music may be known. At
the commencement of the piece, all the parts should sound together. As it proceeds, they should be
in harmony while severally distinct and flowing without break, and thus on to the conclusion."
3-24

The border warden at I requested to be introduced to the Master, saying, "When men of superior
virtue have come to this, I have never been denied the privilege of seeing them." The followers of
the sage introduced him, and when he came out from the interview, he said, "My friends, why are
you distressed by your master's loss of office? The kingdom has long been without the principles of
truth and right; Heaven is going to use your master as a bell with its wooden tongue."
3-25
The Master said of the Shao that it was perfectly beautiful and also perfectly good. He said of the
Wu that it was perfectly beautiful but not perfectly good.
3-26
The Master said, "High station filled without indulgent generosity; ceremonies performed without
reverence; mourning conducted without sorrow - wherewith should I contemplate such ways?"

- Li Ren 4
4-1
The Master said, "It is virtuous manners which constitute the excellence of a neighborhood. If a
man in selecting a residence, do not fix on one where such prevail, how can he be wise?"
4-2
The Master said, "Those who are without virtue cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty
and hardship, or in a condition of enjoyment. The virtuous rest in virtue; the wise desire virtue."
4-3
The Master said, "It is only the (truly) virtuous man, who can love, or who can hate, others."
4-4
The Master said, "If the will be set on virtue, there will be no practice of wickedness."
4-5

The Master said, "Riches and honors are what men desire. If it cannot be obtained in the proper
way, they should not be held. Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If it cannot be avoided in
the proper way, they should not be avoided. If a superior man abandon virtue, how can he fulfill the
requirements of that name? The superior man does not, even for the space of a single meal, act
contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, he cleaves to it. In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it."
4-6

The Master said, "I have not seen a person who loved virtue, or one who hated what was not
8

virtuous. He who loved virtue, would esteem nothing above it. He who hated what is not virtuous,
would practice virtue in such a way that he would not allow anything that is not virtuous to
approach his person. Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to virtue? I have not seen the
case in which his strength would be insufficient. Should there possibly be any such case, I have not
seen it."
4-7
The Master said, "The faults of men are characteristic of the class to which they belong. By
observing a man's faults, it may be known that he is virtuous."
4-8
The Master said, "If a man in the morning hear the right way, he may die in the evening without
regret."
4-9
The Master said, "A scholar, whose mind is set on truth, and who is ashamed of bad clothes and bad
food, is not fit to be discoursed with."
4-10
The Master said, "The superior man, in the world, does not set his mind either for anything, or
against anything; what is right he will follow."
4-11
The Master said, "The superior man thinks of virtue; the small man thinks of comfort. The superior
man thinks of the sanctions of law; the small man thinks of favors which he may receive."
4-12
The Master said: "He who acts with a constant view to his own advantage will be much murmured
against."
4-13
The Master said, "If a prince is able to govern his kingdom with the complaisance proper to the
rules of propriety, what difficulty will he have? If he cannot govern it with that complaisance, what
has he to do with the rules of propriety?"
4-14
The Master said, "A man should say, I am not concerned that I have no place, I am concerned how I
may fit myself for one. I am not concerned that I am not known, I seek to be worthy to be known."
4-15

The Master said, "Shen, my doctrine is that of an all-pervading unity." The disciple Zeng replied,
"Yes." The Master went out, and the other disciples asked, saying, "What do his words mean?"
Zeng said, "The doctrine of our master is to be true to the principles of our nature and the
benevolent exercise of them to others, this and nothing more."
4-16
The Master said, "The mind of the superior man is conversant with righteousness; the mind of the
mean man is conversant with gain."
9

4-17
The Master said, "When we see men of worth, we should think of equaling them; when we see men
of a contrary character, we should turn inwards and examine ourselves."
4-18
The Master said, "In serving his parents, a son may remonstrate with them, but gently; when he sees
that they do not incline to follow his advice, he shows an increased degree of reverence, but does
not abandon his purpose; and should they punish him, he does not allow himself to murmur."
4-19
The Master said, "While his parents are alive, the son may not go abroad to a distance. If he does go
abroad, he must have a fixed place to which he goes."
4-20
The Master said, "If the son for three years does not alter from the way of his father, he may be
called filial."
4-21
The Master said, "The years of parents may by no means not be kept in the memory, as an occasion
at once for joy and for fear."
4-22
The Master said, "The reason why the ancients did not readily give utterance to their words, was
that they feared lest their actions should not come up to them."
4-23
The Master said, "The cautious seldom err."
4-24
The Master said, "The superior man wishes to be slow in his speech and earnest in his conduct."
4-25
The Master said, "Virtue is not left to stand alone. He who practices it will have neighbors."
4-26
Zi You said, "In serving a prince, frequent remonstrances lead to disgrace. Between friends,
frequent reproofs make the friendship distant."

- Gong Ye Chang 5
5-1
The Master said of Gong Ye Chang that he might be wived; although he was put in bonds, he had
not been guilty of any crime. Accordingly, he gave him his own daughter to wife.
5-2
The Master said of Nan Rong that if the country were well governed he would not be out of office,
and if it were ill governed, he would escape punishment and disgrace. He gave him the daughter of
his own elder brother to wife.
5-3
10

The Master said of Zi Jian, "Of superior virtue indeed is such a man! If there were not virtuous men
in Lu, how could this man have acquired this character?"
5-4
Zi Gong asked, "What do you say of me, Ci!" The Master said, "You are a utensil." "What utensil?"
"A gemmed sacrificial utensil."
5-5

Some one said, "Yong is truly virtuous, but he is not ready with his tongue." The Master said, "What
is the good of being ready with the tongue? They who encounter men with smartness of speech for
the most part procure themselves hatred. I know not whether he be truly virtuous, but why should
he show readiness of the tongue?"
5-6
The Master was wishing Qi Diao Kai to enter an official employment. He replied, "I am not yet able
to rest in the assurance of THIS." The Master was pleased.
5-7

The Master said, "My doctrines make no way. I will get upon a raft, and float about on the sea. He
that will accompany me will be You, I dare to say." Zi Lu hearing this was glad, upon which the
Master said, "You is fonder of daring than I am. He does not exercise his judgement upon matters."
5-8

Meng Wu asked about Zi Lu, whether he was perfectly virtuous. The Master said, "I do not know."
He asked again, when the Master replied, "In a kingdom of a thousand chariots, You might be
employed to manage the military levies, but I do not know whether he be perfectly virtuous." "And
what do you say of Qiu?" The Master replied, "In a city of a thousand families, or a clan of a
hundred chariots, Qiu might be employed as governor, but I do not know whether he is perfectly
virtuous." "What do you say of Chi?" The Master replied, "With his sash girt and standing in a
court, Chi might be employed to converse with the visitors and guests, but I do not know whether
he is perfectly virtuous."
5-9

The Master said to Zi Gong, "Which do you consider superior, yourself or Hui?" Zi Gong replied,
"How dare I compare myself with Hui? Hui hears one point and knows all about a subject; I hear
one point, and know a second." The Master said, "You are not equal to him. I grant you, you are not
equal to him."
5-10

Zai Yu being asleep during the daytime, the Master said, "Rotten wood cannot be carved; a wall of
dirty earth will not receive the trowel. This Yu! - what is the use of my reproving him?" The Master
said, "At first, my way with men was to hear their words, and give them credit for their conduct.
Now my way is to hear their words, and look at their conduct. It is from Yu that I have learned to
11

make this change."
5-11
The Master said, "I have not seen a firm and unbending man." Some one replied, "There is Shen
Cheng." "Cheng," said the Master, "is under the influence of his passions; how can he be
pronounced firm and unbending?"
5-12
Zi Gong said, "What I do not wish men to do to me, I also wish not to do to men." The Master said,
"Ci, you have not attained to that."
5-13
Zi Gong said, "The Master's personal displays of his principles and ordinary descriptions of them
may be heard. His discourses about man's nature, and the way of Heaven, cannot be heard."
5-14
When Zi Lu heard anything, if he had not yet succeeded in carrying it into practice, he was only
afraid lest he should hear something else.
5-15

Zi Gong asked, saying, "On what ground did Kong Wen get that title of Wen?" The Master said,
"He was of an active nature and yet fond of learning, and he was not ashamed to ask and learn of
his inferiors! On these grounds he has been styled Wen."
5-16

The Master said of Zi Chan that he had four of the characteristics of a superior man - in his conduct
of himself, he was humble; in serving his superior, he was respectful; in nourishing the people, he
was kind; in ordering the people, he was just.
5-17
The Master said, "Yan Ping knew well how to maintain friendly intercourse. The acquaintance
might be long, but he showed the same respect as at first."
5-18
The Master said, "Zang Wen kept a large tortoise in a house, on the capitals of the pillars of which
he had hills made, and with representations of duckweed on the small pillars above the beams
supporting the rafters. Of what sort was his wisdom?"
5-19

Zi Zhang asked, saying, "The minister Zi Wen thrice took office, and manifested no joy in his
countenance. Thrice he retired from office, and manifested no displeasure. He made it a point to
inform the new minister of the way in which he had conducted the government - what do you say of
him?" The Master replied. "He was loyal." "Was he perfectly virtuous?" "I do not know. How can
he be pronounced perfectly virtuous?" Zi Zhang proceeded, "When the officer Cui killed the prince
12

of Qi, Chen Wen, though he was the owner of forty horses, abandoned them and left the country.
Coming to another state, he said, 'They are here like our great officer, Cui,' and left it. He came to a
second state, and with the same observation left it also - what do you say of him?" The Master
replied, "He was pure." "Was he perfectly virtuous?" "I do not know. How can he be pronounced
perfectly virtuous?"
5-20
Ji Wen thought thrice, and then acted. When the Master was informed of it, he said, "Twice may
do."
5-21
The Master said, "When good order prevailed in his country, Ning Wu acted the part of a wise man.
When his country was in disorder, he acted the part of a stupid man. Others may equal his wisdom,
but they cannot equal his stupidity."
5-22
When the Master was in Chen, he said, "Let me return! Let me return! The little children of my
school are ambitious and too hasty. They are accomplished and complete so far, but they do not
know how to restrict and shape themselves."
5-23
The Master said, "Bo Yi and Shu Qi did not keep the former wickednesses of men in mind, and
hence the resentments directed towards them were few."
5-24
The Master said, "Who says of Wei Sheng Gao that he is upright? One begged some vinegar of him,
and he begged it of a neighbor and gave it to the man."
5-25

The Master said, "Fine words, an insinuating appearance, and excessive respect - Zuo Qiu Ming
was ashamed of them. I also am ashamed of them. To conceal resentment against a person, and
appear friendly with him - Zuo Qiu Ming was ashamed of such conduct. I also am ashamed of it."
5-26

Yan Yuan and Ji Lu being by his side, the Master said to them, "Come, let each of you tell his
wishes." Zi Lu said, "I should like, having chariots and horses, and light fur clothes, to share them
with my friends, and though they should spoil them, I would not be displeased." Yan Yuan said, "I
should like not to boast of my excellence, nor to make a display of my meritorious deeds." Zi Lu
then said, "I should like, sir, to hear your wishes." The Master said, "They are, in regard to the aged,
to give them rest; in regard to friends, to show them sincerity; in regard to the young, to treat them
tenderly."
5-27
The Master said, "It is all over. I have not yet seen one who could perceive his faults, and inwardly
accuse himself."
5-28
13

The Master said, "In a hamlet of ten families, there may be found one honorable and sincere as I
am, but not so fond of learning."

- Yong Ye 6
6-1
The Master said, "There is Yong - he might occupy the place of a prince."
6-2

Zhong Gong asked about Zi Sang Bo Zi. The Master said, "He may pass. He does not mind small
matters." Zhong Gong said, "If a man cherish in himself a reverential feeling of the necessity of
attention to business, though he may be easy in small matters in his government of the people, that
may be allowed. But if he cherish in himself that easy feeling, and also carry it out in his practice, is
not such an easy mode of procedure excessive?" The Master said, "Yong's words are right."
6-3

The Duke Ai asked which of the disciples loved to learn. Confucius replied to him, "There was Yan
Hui; HE loved to learn. He did not transfer his anger; he did not repeat a fault. Unfortunately, his
appointed time was short and he died; and now there is not such another. I have not yet heard of any
one who loves to learn as he did."
6-4

Zi Hua being employed on a mission to Qi, the disciple Ran requested grain for his mother. The
Master said, "Give her a fu." Ran requested more. "Give her an yu," said the Master. Ran gave her
five bing. The Master said, "When Chi was proceeding to Qi, he had fat horses to his carriage, and
wore light furs. I have heard that a superior man helps the distressed, but does not add to the wealth
of the rich."
6-5
Yuan Si being made governor of his town by the Master, he gave him nine hundred measures of
grain, but Si declined them. The Master said, "Do not decline them. May you not give them away in
the neighborhoods, hamlets, towns, and villages?"
6-6
The Master, speaking of Zhong Gong, said, "If the calf of a brindled cow be red and horned,
although men may not wish to use it, would the spirits of the mountains and rivers put it aside?"
6-7
The Master said, "Such was Hui that for three months there would be nothing in his mind contrary
to perfect virtue. The others may attain to this on some days or in some months, but nothing more."
6-8

Ji Kang asked about Zhong You, whether he was fit to be employed as an officer of government.
The Master said, "You is a man of decision; what difficulty would he find in being an officer of
government?" Kang asked, "Is Ci fit to be employed as an officer of government?" and was
14

answered, "Ci is a man of intelligence; what difficulty would he find in being an officer of
government?" And to the same question about Qiu the Master gave the same reply, saying, "Qiu is a
man of various ability."
6-9
The chief of the Ji family sent to ask Min Zi Qian to be governor of Fei. Min Zi Qian said, "Decline
the offer for me politely. If any one come again to me with a second invitation, I shall be obliged to
go and live on the banks of the Wen."
6-10

Bo Niu being ill, the Master went to ask for him. He took hold of his hand through the window, and
said, "It is killing him. It is the appointment of Heaven, alas! That such a man should have such a
sickness! That such a man should have such a sickness!"
6-11

The Master said, "Admirable indeed was the virtue of Hui! With a single bamboo dish of rice, a
single gourd dish of drink, and living in his mean narrow lane, while others could not have endured
the distress, he did not allow his joy to be affected by it. Admirable indeed was the virtue of Hui!"
6-12
Ran Qiu said, "It is not that I do not delight in your doctrines, but my strength is insufficient." The
Master said, "Those whose strength is insufficient give over in the middle of the way but now you
limit yourself."
6-13
The Master said to Zi Xia, "Do you be a scholar after the style of the superior man, and not after
that of the mean man."
6-14

Zi You being governor of Wu Cheng, the Master said to him, "Have you got good men there?" He
answered, "There is Dan Tai Mie Ming, who never in walking takes a short cut, and never comes to
my office, excepting on public business."
6-15
The Master said, "Meng Zhi Fan does not boast of his merit. Being in the rear on an occasion of
flight, when they were about to enter the gate, he whipped up his horse, saying, 'It is not that I dare
to be last. My horse would not advance.'"
6-16
The Master said, "Without the specious speech of the litanist Tuo and the beauty of the prince Zhao
of Song, it is difficult to escape in the present age."
6-17
The Master said, "Who can go out but by the door? How is it that men will not walk according to
these ways?"
6-18
15

The Master said, "Where the solid qualities are in excess of accomplishments, we have rusticity;
where the accomplishments are in excess of the solid qualities, we have the manners of a clerk.
When the accomplishments and solid qualities are equally blended, we then have the man of
virtue."
6-19
The Master said, "Man is born for uprightness. If a man lose his uprightness, and yet live, his
escape from death is the effect of mere good fortune."
6-20
The Master said, "They who know the truth are not equal to those who love it, and they who love it
are not equal to those who delight in it."
6-21
The Master said, "To those whose talents are above mediocrity, the highest subjects may be
announced. To those who are below mediocrity, the highest subjects may not be announced."
6-22

Fan Chi asked what constituted wisdom. The Master said, "To give one's self earnestly to the duties
due to men, and, while respecting spiritual beings, to keep aloof from them, may be called wisdom."
He asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, "The man of virtue makes the difficulty to be
overcome his first business, and success only a subsequent consideration - this may be called
perfect virtue."
6-23
The Master said, "The wise find pleasure in water; the virtuous find pleasure in hills. The wise are
active; the virtuous are tranquil. The wise are joyful; the virtuous are long-lived."
6-24
The Master said, "Qi, by one change, would come to the State of Lu. Lu, by one change, would
come to a State where true principles predominated."
6-25
The Master said, "A cornered vessel without corners - a strange cornered vessel! A strange cornered
vessel!"
6-26

Zai Wo asked, saying, "A benevolent man, though it be told him, 'There is a man in the well' will go
in after him, I suppose." Confucius said, "Why should he do so? A superior man may be made to go
to the well, but he cannot be made to go down into it. He may be imposed upon, but he cannot be
fooled."
6-27
The Master said, "The superior man, extensively studying all learning, and keeping himself under
the restraint of the rules of propriety, may thus likewise not overstep what is right."
6-28
The Master having visited Nan Zi, Zi Lu was displeased, on which the Master swore, saying,
16

"Wherein I have done improperly, may Heaven reject me! may Heaven reject me!"
6-29
The Master said, "Perfect is the virtue which is according to the Constant Mean! Rare for a long
time has been its practice among the people."
6-30

Zi Gong said, "Suppose the case of a man extensively conferring benefits on the people, and able to
assist all, what would you say of him? Might he be called perfectly virtuous?" The Master said,
"Why speak only of virtue in connection with him? Must he not have the qualities of a sage? Even
Yao and Shun were still solicitous about this. Now the man of perfect virtue, wishing to be
established himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to be enlarged himself, he seeks also to
enlarge others. To be able to judge of others by what is nigh in ourselves - this may be called the art
of virtue."

- Shu Er 7
7-1
The Master said, "A transmitter and not a maker, believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to
compare myself with our old Peng."
7-2
The Master said, "The silent treasuring up of knowledge; learning without satiety; and instructing
others without being wearied - which one of these things belongs to me?"
7-3
The Master said, "The learning virtue without proper cultivation; the not thoroughly discussing
what is learned; not being able to move towards righteousness of which a knowledge is gained; and
not being able to change what is not good - these are the things which occasion me solicitude."
7-4
When the Master was unoccupied with business, his manner was easy, and he looked pleased.
7-5
The Master said, "Extreme is my decay. For a long time, I have not dreamed, as I was wont to do,
that I saw the duke of Zhou."
7-6
The Master said, "Let the will be set on the path of duty. Let every attainment in what is good be
firmly grasped. Let perfect virtue be accorded with. Let relaxation and enjoyment be found in the
polite arts."
7-7
The Master said, "From the man bringing his bundle of dried flesh for my teaching upwards, I have
never refused instruction to any one."
7-8
The Master said, "I do not open up the truth to one who is not eager to get knowledge, nor help out
any one who is not anxious to explain himself. When I have presented one corner of a subject to any
17

one, and he cannot from it learn the other three, I do not repeat my lesson."
7-9
When the Master was eating by the side of a mourner, he never ate to the full.
7-10
He did not sing on the same day in which he had been weeping.
7-11

The Master said to Yan Yuan, "When called to office, to undertake its duties; when not so called, to
lie retired - it is only I and you who have attained to this." Zi Lu said, "If you had the conduct of the
armies of a great state, whom would you have to act with you?" The Master said, "I would not have
him to act with me, who will unarmed attack a tiger, or cross a river without a boat, dying without
any regret. My associate must be the man who proceeds to action full of solicitude, who is fond of
adjusting his plans, and then carries them into execution."
7-12
The Master said, "If the search for riches is sure to be successful, though I should become a groom
with whip in hand to get them, I will do so. As the search may not be successful, I will follow after
that which I love."
7-13
The things in reference to which the Master exercised the greatest caution were - fasting, war, and
sickness.
7-14
When the Master was in Qi, he heard the Shao, and for three months did not know the taste of flesh.
"I did not think'" he said, "that music could have been made so excellent as this."
7-15

Ran You said, "Is our Master for the ruler of Wei?" Zi Gong said, "Oh! I will ask him." He went in
accordingly, and said, "What sort of men were Bo Yi and Shu Qi?" "They were ancient worthies,"
said the Master. "Did they have any repinings because of their course?" The Master again replied,
"They sought to act virtuously, and they did so; what was there for them to repine about?" On this,
Zi Gong went out and said, "Our Master is not for him."
7-16
The Master said, "With coarse rice to eat, with water to drink, and my bended arm for a pillow; I
have still joy in the midst of these things. Riches and honors acquired by unrighteousness, are to me
as a floating cloud."
7-17
The Master said, "If some years were added to my life, I would give fifty to the study of the Yi, and
then I might come to be without great faults."
7-18
The Master's frequent themes of discourse were: the Odes, the History, and the maintenance of the
18

Rules of Propriety. On all these he frequently discoursed.
7-19

The Duke of She asked Zi Lu about Confucius, and Zi Lu did not answer him. The Master said,
"Why did you not say to him, 'He is simply a man, who in his eager pursuit of knowledge forgets
his food, who in the joy of its attainment forgets his sorrows, and who does not perceive that old
age is coming on?'"
7-20
The Master said, "I am not one who was born in the possession of knowledge; I am one who is fond
of antiquity, and earnest in seeking it there."
7-21
The subjects on which the Master did not talk, were: extraordinary things, feats of strength,
disorder, and spiritual beings.
7-22
The Master said, "When I walk along with two others, they may serve me as my teachers. I will
select their good qualities and follow them, their bad qualities and avoid them."
7-23
The Master said, "Heaven produced the virtue that is in me. Huan Tui - what can he do to me?"
7-24
The Master said, "Do you think, my disciples, that I have any concealments? I conceal nothing from
you. There is nothing which I do that is not shown to you, my disciples; that is my way."
7-25
There were four things which the Master taught: letters, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthfulness.
7-26

The Master said, "A sage it is not mine to see; could I see a man of real talent and virtue, that would
satisfy me." The Master said, "A good man it is not mine to see; could I see a man possessed of
constancy, that would satisfy me. Having not and yet affecting to have, empty and yet affecting to
be full, straitened and yet affecting to be at ease - it is difficult with such characteristics to have
constancy."
7-27
The Master angled, but did not use a net. He shot, but not at birds perching.
7-28

The Master said, "There may be those who act without knowing why. I do not do so. Hearing much
and selecting what is good and following it; seeing much and keeping it in memory - this is the
second style of knowledge."
7-29

19

It was difficult to talk (profitably and reputably) with the people of Hu Xiang, and a lad of that
place having had an interview with the Master, the disciples doubted. The Master said, "I admit
people's approach to me without committing myself as to what they may do when they have retired.
Why must one be so severe? If a man purify himself to wait upon me, I receive him so purified,
without guaranteeing his past conduct."
7-30
The Master said, "Is virtue a thing remote? I wish to be virtuous, and lo! virtue is at hand."
7-31

The minister of crime of Chen asked whether the duke Zhao knew propriety, and Confucius said,
"He knew propriety." Confucius having retired, the minister bowed to Wu Ma Qi to come forward,
and said, "I have heard that the superior man is not a partisan. May the superior man be a partisan
also? The prince married a daughter of the house of Wu, of the same surname with himself, and
called her, 'The elder Zi of Wu.' If the prince knew propriety, who does not know it?" Wu Ma Qi
reported these remarks, and the Master said, "I am fortunate! If I have any errors, people are sure to
know them."
7-32
When the Master was in company with a person who was singing, if he sang well, he would make
him repeat the song, while he accompanied it with his own voice.
7-33
The Master said, "In letters I am perhaps equal to other men, but the character of the superior man,
carrying out in his conduct what he professes, is what I have not yet attained to."
7-34

The Master said, "The sage and the man of perfect virtue - how dare I rank myself with them? It
may simply be said of me, that I strive to become such without satiety, and teach others without
weariness." Gong Xi Hua said, "This is just what we, the disciples, cannot imitate you in."
7-35

The Master being very sick, Zi Lu asked leave to pray for him. He said, "May such a thing be
done?" Zi Lu replied, "It may. In the Eulogies it is said, 'Prayer has been made for thee to the spirits
of the upper and lower worlds.'" The Master said, "My praying has been for a long time."
7-36
The Master said, "Extravagance leads to insubordination, and parsimony to meanness. It is better to
be mean than to be insubordinate."
7-37
The Master said, "The superior man is satisfied and composed; the mean man is always full of
distress."
7-38
The Master was mild, and yet dignified; majestic, and yet not fierce; respectful, and yet easy.
20

- Tai Bo 8
8-1
The Master said, "Tai Bo may be said to have reached the highest point of virtuous action. Thrice he
declined the kingdom, and the people in ignorance of his motives could not express their
approbation of his conduct."
8-2

The Master said, "Respectfulness, without the rules of propriety, becomes laborious bustle;
carefulness, without the rules of propriety, becomes timidity; boldness, without the rules of
propriety, becomes insubordination; straightforwardness, without the rules of propriety, becomes
rudeness. When those who are in high stations perform well all their duties to their relations, the
people are aroused to virtue. When old friends are not neglected by them, the people are preserved
from meanness."
8-3

The philosopher Zeng being ill, he cared to him the disciples of his school, and said, "Uncover my
feet, uncover my hands. It is said in the Book of Poetry, 'We should be apprehensive and cautious,
as if on the brink of a deep gulf, as if treading on thin ice, I and so have I been. Now and hereafter, I
know my escape from all injury to my person. O ye, my little children."
8-4

The philosopher Zeng being ill, Meng Jing went to ask how he was. Zeng said to him, "When a bird
is about to die, its notes are mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are good. There are
three principles of conduct which the man of high rank should consider specially important: that in
his deportment and manner he keep from violence and heedlessness; that in regulating his
countenance he keep near to sincerity; and that in his words and tones he keep far from lowness and
impropriety. As to such matters as attending to the sacrificial vessels, there are the proper officers
for them."
8-5

The philosopher Zeng said, "Gifted with ability, and yet putting questions to those who were not so;
possessed of much, and yet putting questions to those possessed of little; having, as though he had
not; full, and yet counting himself as empty; offended against, and yet entering into no altercation;
formerly I had a friend who pursued this style of conduct."
8-6

The philosopher Zeng said, "Suppose that there is an individual who can be entrusted with the
charge of a young orphan prince, and can be commissioned with authority over a state of a hundred
li, and whom no emergency however great can drive from his principles - is such a man a superior
man? He is a superior man indeed."
8-7
21

The philosopher Zeng said, "The officer may not be without breadth of mind and vigorous
endurance. His burden is heavy and his course is long. Perfect virtue is the burden which he
considers it is his to sustain - is it not heavy? Only with death does his course stop - is it not long?"
8-8
The Master said, "It is by the Odes that the mind is aroused. It is by the Rules of Propriety that the
character is established. It is from Music that the finish is received."
8-9
The Master said, "The people may be made to follow a path of action, but they may not be made to
understand it."
8-10
The Master said, "The man who is fond of daring and is dissatisfied with poverty, will proceed to
insubordination. So will the man who is not virtuous, when you carry your dislike of him to an
extreme."
8-11
The Master said, "Though a man have abilities as admirable as those of the duke of Zhou, yet if he
be proud and niggardly, those other things are really not worth being looked at."
8-12
The Master said, "It is not easy to find a man who has learned for three years without coming to be
good."
8-13

The Master said, "With sincere faith he unites the love of learning; holding firm to death, he is
perfecting the excellence of his course. Such a one will not enter a tottering state, nor dwell in a
disorganized one. When right principles of government prevail in the kingdom, he will show
himself; when they are prostrated, he will keep concealed. When a country is well governed,
poverty and a mean condition are things to be ashamed of. When a country is ill governed, riches
and honor are things to be ashamed of."
8-14
The Master said, "He who is not in any particular office has nothing to do with plans for the
administration of its duties."
8-15
The Master said, "When the music master Zhi first entered on his office, the finish of the Guan Ju
was magnificent - how it filled the ears!"
8-16
The Master said, "Ardent and yet not upright, stupid and yet not attentive; simple and yet not
sincere - such persons I do not understand."
8-17
The Master said, "Learn as if you could not reach your object, and were always fearing also lest you
should lose it."
22

8-18
The Master said, "How majestic was the manner in which Shun and Yu held possession of the
empire, as if it were nothing to them!"
8-19

The Master said, "Great indeed was Yao as a sovereign! How majestic was he! It is only Heaven
that is grand, and only Yao corresponded to it. How vast was his virtue! The people could find no
name for it. How majestic was he in the works which he accomplished! How glorious in the elegant
regulations which he instituted!"
8-20

Shun had five ministers, and the empire was well governed. King Wu said, "I have ten able
ministers." Confucius said, "Is not the saying that talents are difficult to find, true? Only when the
dynasties of Tang and Yu met, were they more abundant than in this of Zhou, yet there was a
woman among them. The able ministers were no more than nine men. King Wen possessed two of
the three parts of the empire, and with those he served the dynasty of Yin. The virtue of the house of
Zhou may be said to have reached the highest point indeed."
8-21

The Master said, "I can find no flaw in the character of Yu. He used himself coarse food and drink,
but displayed the utmost filial piety towards the spirits. His ordinary garments were poor, but he
displayed the utmost elegance in his sacrificial cap and apron. He lived in a low, mean house, but
expended all his strength on the ditches and water channels. I can find nothing like a flaw in Yü."

- Zi Han 9
9-1
The subjects of which the Master seldom spoke were: profitableness, and also the appointments of
Heaven, and perfect virtue.
9-2

A man of the village of Da Xiang said, "Great indeed is the philosopher Kong! His learning is
extensive, and yet he does not render his name famous by any particular thing." The Master heard
the observation, and said to his disciples, "What shall I practice? Shall I practice charioteering, or
shall I practice archery? I will practice charioteering."
9-3

The Master said, "The linen cap is that prescribed by the rules of ceremony, but now a silk one is
worn. It is economical, and I follow the common practice. The rules of ceremony prescribe the
bowing below the hall, but now the practice is to bow only after ascending it. That is arrogant. I
continue to bow below the hall, though I oppose the common practice."
9-4
23

There were four things from which the Master was entirely free. He had no foregone conclusions,
no arbitrary predeterminations, no obstinacy, and no egoism.
9-5

The Master was put in fear in Kuang. He said, "After the death of King Wen, was not the cause of
truth lodged here in me? If Heaven had wished to let this cause of truth perish, then I, a future
mortal, should not have got such a relation to that cause. While Heaven does not let the cause of
truth perish, what can the people of Kuang do to me?"
9-6

A high officer asked Zi Gong, saying, "May we not say that your Master is a sage? How various is
his ability!" Zi Gong said, "Certainly Heaven has endowed him unlimitedly. He is about a sage.
And, moreover, his ability is various." The Master heard of the conversation and said, "Does the
high officer know me? When I was young, my condition was low, and therefore I acquired my
ability in many things, but they were mean matters. Must the superior man have such variety of
ability? He does not need variety of ability."
9-7
Lao said, "The Master said, 'Having no official employment, I acquired many arts.'"
9-8
The Master said, "Am I indeed possessed of knowledge? I am not knowing. But if a mean person,
who appears quite empty-like, ask anything of me, I set it forth from one end to the other, and
exhaust it."
9-9
The Master said, "The Feng bird does not come; the river sends forth no map - it is all over with
me!"
9-10
When the Master saw a person in a mourning dress, or any one with the cap and upper and lower
garments of full dress, or a blind person, on observing them approaching, though they were younger
than himself, he would rise up, and if he had to pass by them, he would do so hastily.
9-11

Yan Yuan, in admiration of the Master's doctrines, sighed and said, "I looked up to them, and they
seemed to become more high; I tried to penetrate them, and they seemed to become more firm; I
looked at them before me, and suddenly they seemed to be behind. The Master, by orderly method,
skilfully leads men on. He enlarged my mind with learning, and taught me the restraints of
propriety. When I wish to give over the study of his doctrines, I cannot do so, and having exerted all
my ability, there seems something to stand right up before me; but though I wish to follow and lay
hold of it, I really find no way to do so."
9-12

The Master being very ill, Zi Lu wished the disciples to act as ministers to him. During a remission
24

of his illness, he said, "Long has the conduct of You been deceitful! By pretending to have ministers
when I have them not, whom should I impose upon? Should I impose upon Heaven? Moreover,
than that I should die in the hands of ministers, is it not better that I should die in the hands of you,
my disciples? And though I may not get a great burial, shall I die upon the road?"
9-13

Zi Gong said, "There is a beautiful gem here. Should I lay it up in a case and keep it? or should I
seek for a good price and sell it?" The Master said, "Sell it! Sell it! But I would wait for one to offer
the price."
9-14
The Master was wishing to go and live among the nine wild tribes of the east. Some one said, "They
are rude. How can you do such a thing?" The Master said, "If a superior man dwelt among them,
what rudeness would there be?"
9-15
The Master said, "I returned from Wei to Lu, and then the music was reformed, and the pieces in the
Royal songs and Praise songs all found their proper places."
9-16
The Master said, "Abroad, to serve the high ministers and nobles; at home, to serve one's father and
elder brothers; in all duties to the dead, not to dare not to exert one's self; and not to be overcome of
wine - which one of these things do I attain to?"
9-17
The Master standing by a stream, said, "It passes on just like this, not ceasing day or night!"
9-18
The Master said, "I have not seen one who loves virtue as he loves beauty."
9-19
The Master said, "The prosecution of learning may be compared to what may happen in raising a
mound. If there want but one basket of earth to complete the work, and I stop, the stopping is my
own work. It may be compared to throwing down the earth on the level ground. Though but one
basketful is thrown at a time, the advancing with it is my own going forward."
9-20
The Master said, "Never flagging when I set forth anything to him - ah! that is Hui."
9-21
The Master said of Yan Yuan, "Alas! I saw his constant advance. I never saw him stop in his
progress."
9-22
The Master said, "There are cases in which the blade springs, but the plant does not go on to flower!
There are cases where it flowers but no fruit is subsequently produced!"
9-23
The Master said, "A youth is to be regarded with respect. How do we know that his future will not
25

be equal to our present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty, and has not made himself heard of, then
indeed he will not be worth being regarded with respect."
9-24

The Master said, "Can men refuse to assent to the words of strict admonition? But it is reforming
the conduct because of them which is valuable. Can men refuse to be pleased with words of gentle
advice? But it is unfolding their aim which is valuable. If a man be pleased with these words, but
does not unfold their aim, and assents to those, but does not reform his conduct, I can really do
nothing with him."
9-25
The Master said, "Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles. Have no friends not equal to
yourself. When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them."
9-26
The Master said, "The commander of the forces of a large state may be carried off, but the will of
even a common man cannot be taken from him."
9-27

The Master said, "Dressed himself in a tattered robe quilted with hemp, yet standing by the side of
men dressed in furs, and not ashamed - ah! it is You who is equal to this! He dislikes none, he
covets nothing - what can he do but what is good!" Zi Lu kept continually repeating these words of
the ode, when the Master said, "Those things are by no means sufficient to constitute perfect
excellence."
9-28
The Master said, "When the year becomes cold, then we know how the pine and the cypress are the
last to lose their leaves."
9-29
The Master said, "The wise are free from perplexities; the virtuous from anxiety; and the bold from
fear."
9-30
The Master said, "There are some with whom we may study in common, but we shall find them
unable to go along with us to principles. Perhaps we may go on with them to principles, but we
shall find them unable to get established in those along with us. Or if we may get so established
along with them, we shall find them unable to weigh occurring events along with us."
9-31
"How the flowers of the aspen-plum flutter and turn! Do I not think of you? But your house is
distant." The Master said, "It is the want of thought about it. How is it distant?"

- Xiang Dang 10
10-1
Confucius, in his village, looked simple and sincere, and as if he were not able to speak. When he
was in the prince's ancestral temple, or in the court, he spoke minutely on every point, but
26

cautiously.
10-2
When he was waiting at court, in speaking with the great officers of the lower grade, he spoke
freely, but in a straightforward manner; in speaking with those of the higher grade, he did so
blandly, but precisely. When the ruler was present, his manner displayed respectful uneasiness; it
was grave, but self-possessed.
10-3

When the prince called him to employ him in the reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to
change, and his legs to move forward with difficulty. He inclined himself to the other officers
among whom he stood, moving his left or right arm, as their position required, but keeping the
skirts of his robe before and behind evenly adjusted. He hastened forward, with his arms like the
wings of a bird. When the guest had retired, he would report to the prince, "The visitor is not
turning round any more."
10-4

When he entered the palace gate, he seemed to bend his body, as if it were not sufficient to admit
him. When he was standing, he did not occupy the middle of the gateway; when he passed in or out,
he did not tread upon the threshold. When he was passing the vacant place of the prince, his
countenance appeared to change, and his legs to bend under him, and his words came as if he hardly
had breath to utter them. He ascended the reception hall, holding up his robe with both his hands,
and his body bent; holding in his breath also, as if he dared not breathe. When he came out from the
audience, as soon as he had descended one step, he began to relax his countenance, and had a
satisfied look. When he had got the bottom of the steps, he advanced rapidly to his place, with his
arms like wings, and on occupying it, his manner still showed respectful uneasiness.
10-5

When he was carrying the scepter of his ruler, he seemed to bend his body, as if he were not able to
bear its weight. He did not hold it higher than the position of the hands in making a bow, nor lower
than their position in giving anything to another. His countenance seemed to change, and look
apprehensive, and he dragged his feet along as if they were held by something to the ground. In
presenting the presents with which he was charged, he wore a placid appearance. At his private
audience, he looked highly pleased.
10-6

The superior man did not use a deep purple, or a puce color, in the ornaments of his dress. Even in
his undress, he did not wear anything of a red or reddish color. In warm weather, he had a single
garment either of coarse or fine texture, but he wore it displayed over an inner garment. Over lamb's
fur he wore a garment of black; over fawn's fur one of white; and over fox's fur one of yellow. The
fur robe of his undress was long, with the right sleeve short. He required his sleeping dress to be
half as long again as his body. When staying at home, he used thick furs of the fox or the badger.
When he put off mourning, he wore all the appendages of the girdle. His undergarment, except
when it was required to be of the curtain shape, was made of silk cut narrow above and wide below.
27

He did not wear lamb's fur or a black cap on a visit of condolence. On the first day of the month he
put on his court robes, and presented himself at court.
10-7
When fasting, he thought it necessary to have his clothes brightly clean and made of linen cloth.
When fasting, he thought it necessary to change his food, and also to change the place where he
commonly sat in the apartment.
10-8

He did not dislike to have his rice finely cleaned, nor to have his mince meat cut quite small. He did
not eat rice which had been injured by heat or damp and turned sour, nor fish or flesh which was
gone. He did not eat what was discolored, or what was of a bad flavor, nor anything which was ill-
cooked, or was not in season. He did not eat meat which was not cut properly, nor what was served
without its proper sauce. Though there might be a large quantity of meat, he would not allow what
he took to exceed the due proportion for the rice. It was only in wine that he laid down no limit for
himself, but he did not allow himself to be confused by it. He did not partake of wine and dried
meat bought in the market. He was never without ginger when he ate. He did not eat much. When
he had been assisting at the prince's sacrifice, he did not keep the flesh which he received overnight.
The flesh of his family sacrifice he did not keep over three days. If kept over three days, people
could not eat it. When eating, he did not converse. When in bed, he did not speak. Although his
food might be coarse rice and vegetable soup, he would offer a little of it in sacrifice with a grave,
respectful air.
10-9
If his mat was not straight, he did not sit on it.
10-10
When the villagers were drinking together, upon those who carried staffs going out, he went out
immediately after. When the villagers were going through their ceremonies to drive away
pestilential influences, he put on his court robes and stood on the eastern steps.
10-11
When he was sending complimentary inquiries to any one in another state, he bowed twice as he
escorted the messenger away. Ji Kang having sent him a present of physic, he bowed and received
it, saying, "I do not know it. I dare not taste it."
10-12
The stable being burned down, when he was at court, on his return he said, "Has any man been
hurt?" He did not ask about the horses.
10-13

When the prince sent him a gift of cooked meat, he would adjust his mat, first taste it, and then give
it away to others. When the prince sent him a gift of undressed meat, he would have it cooked, and
offer it to the spirits of his ancestors. When the prince sent him a gift of a living animal, he would
keep it alive. When he was in attendance on the prince and joining in the entertainment, the prince
only sacrificed. He first tasted everything. When he was ill and the prince came to visit him, he had
28

his head to the east, made his court robes be spread over him, and drew his girdle across them.
When the prince's order called him, without waiting for his carriage to be yoked, he went at once.
10-14
When he entered the ancestral temple of the state, he asked about everything.
10-15
When any of his friends died, if he had no relations who could be depended on for the necessary
offices, he would say, "I will bury him." When a friend sent him a present, though it might be a
carriage and horses, he did not bow. The only present for which he bowed was that of the flesh of
sacrifice.
10-16

In bed, he did not lie like a corpse. At home, he did not put on any formal deportment. When he saw
any one in a mourning dress, though it might be an acquaintance, he would change countenance;
when he saw any one wearing the cap of full dress, or a blind person, though he might be in his
undress, he would salute him in a ceremonious manner. To any person in mourning he bowed
forward to the crossbar of his carriage; he bowed in the same way to any one bearing the tables of
population. When he was at an entertainment where there was an abundance of provisions set
before him, he would change countenance and rise up. On a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent
wind, he would change countenance.
10-17
When he was about to mount his carriage, he would stand straight, holding the cord. When he was
in the carriage, he did not turn his head quite round, he did not talk hastily, he did not point with his
hands.
10-18
Seeing the countenance, it instantly rises. It flies round, and by and by settles. The Master said,
"There is the hen-pheasant on the hill bridge. At its season! At its season!" Zi Lu made a motion to
it. Thrice it smelled him and then rose.

- Xian Jin 11
11-1
The Master said, "The men of former times in the matters of ceremonies and music were rustics, it
is said, while the men of these latter times, in ceremonies and music, are accomplished gentlemen.
If I have occasion to use those things, I follow the men of former times."
11-2
The Master said, "Of those who were with me in Chen and Cai, there are none to be found to enter
my door."
11-3

Distinguished for their virtuous principles and practice, there were Yan Yuan, Min Zi Qian, Ran Bo
Niu, and Zhong Gong; for their ability in speech, Zai Wo and Zi Gong; for their administrative
talents, Ran You and Ji Lu; for their literary acquirements, Zi You and Zi Xia.
29

11-4
The Master said, "Hui gives me no assistance. There is nothing that I say in which he does not
delight."
11-5
The Master said, "Filial indeed is Min Zi Qian! Other people say nothing of him different from the
report of his parents and brothers."
11-6
Nan Rong was frequently repeating the lines about a white scepter stone. Confucius gave him the
daughter of his elder brother to wife.
11-7

Ji Kang asked which of the disciples loved to learn. Confucius replied to him, "There was Yen Hui;
he loved to learn. Unfortunately his appointed time was short, and he died. Now there is no one who
loves to learn, as he did."
11-8

When Yan Yuan died, Yan Lu begged the carriage of the Master to sell and get an outer shell for his
son's coffin. The Master said, "Every one calls his son his son, whether he has talents or has not
talents. There was Li; when he died, he had a coffin but no outer shell. I would not walk on foot to
get a shell for him, because, having followed in the rear of the great officers, it was not proper that I
should walk on foot."
11-9
When Yan Yuan died, the Master said, "Alas! Heaven is destroying me! Heaven is destroying me!"
11-10
When Yan Yuan died, the Master bewailed him exceedingly, and the disciples who were with him
said, "Master, your grief is excessive!" "Is it excessive?" said he. "If I am not to mourn bitterly for
this man, for whom should I mourn?"
11-11

When Yan Yuan died, the disciples wished to give him a great funeral, and the Master said, "You
may not do so." The disciples did bury him in great style. The Master said, "Hui behaved towards
me as his father. I have not been able to treat him as my son. The fault is not mine; it belongs to
you, O disciples."
11-12

Ji Lu asked about serving the spirits of the dead. The Master said, "While you are not able to serve
men, how can you serve their spirits?" Ji Lu added, "I venture to ask about death?" He was
answered, "While you do not know life, how can you know about death?"
11-13

The disciple Min was standing by his side, looking bland and precise; Zi Lu, looking bold and
30

soldierly; Ran You and Zi Gong, with a free and straightforward manner. The Master was pleased.
He said, "You there - he will not die a natural death."
11-14

Some parties in Lu were going to take down and rebuild the Long Treasury. Min Zi Qian said,
"Suppose it were to be repaired after its old style; why must it be altered and made anew?" The
Master said, "This man seldom speaks; when he does, he is sure to hit the point."
11-15

The Master said, "What has the lute of You to do in my door?" The other disciples began not to
respect Zi Lu. The Master said, "You has ascended to the hall, though he has not yet passed into the
inner apartments."
11-16

Zi Gong asked which of the two, Shi or Shang, was the superior. The Master said, "Shi goes beyond
the due mean, and Shang does not come up to it." "Then," said Zi Gong, "the superiority is with Shi,
I suppose." The Master said, "To go beyond is as wrong as to fall short."
11-17

The head of the Ji family was richer than the duke of Zhou had been, and yet Qiu collected his
imposts for him, and increased his wealth. The Master said, "He is no disciple of mine. My little
children, beat the drum and assail him."
11-18
Chai is simple. Shen is dull. Shi is specious. You is coarse.
11-19
The Master said, "There is Hui! He has nearly attained to perfect virtue. He is often in want. Ci does
not acquiesce in the appointments of Heaven, and his goods are increased by him. Yet his judgments
are often correct."
11-20
Zi Zhang asked what were the characteristics of the good man. The Master said, "He does not tread
in the footsteps of others, but moreover, he does not enter the chamber of the sage."
11-21
The Master said, "If, because a man's discourse appears solid and sincere, we allow him to be a
good man, is he really a superior man? or is his gravity only in appearance?"
11-22

Zi Lu asked whether he should immediately carry into practice what he heard. The Master said,
"There are your father and elder brothers to be consulted - why should you act on that principle of
immediately carrying into practice what you hear?" Ran You asked the same, whether he should
31

immediately carry into practice what he heard, and the Master answered, "Immediately carry into
practice what you hear." Gong Xi Hua said, "You asked whether he should carry immediately into
practice what he heard, and you said, 'There are your father and elder brothers to be consulted.' Qiu
asked whether he should immediately carry into practice what he heard, and you said, 'Carry it
immediately into practice.' I, Chi, am perplexed, and venture to ask you for an explanation." The
Master said, "Qiu is retiring and slow; therefore I urged him forward. You has more than his own
share of energy; therefore I kept him back."
11-23
The Master was put in fear in Kuang and Yan Yuan fell behind. The Master, on his rejoining him,
said, "I thought you had died." Hui replied, "While you were alive, how should I presume to die?"
11-24

Ji Zi Ran asked whether Zhong You and Ran Qiu could be called great ministers. The Master said,
"I thought you would ask about some extraordinary individuals, and you only ask about You and
Qiu! What is called a great minister, is one who serves his prince according to what is right, and
when he finds he cannot do so, retires. Now, as to You and Qiu, they may be called ordinary
ministers." Zi Ran said, "Then they will always follow their chief - will they?" The Master said, "In
an act of parricide or regicide, they would not follow him."
11-25

Zi Lu got Zi Gao appointed governor of Fei. The Master said, "You are injuring a man's son." Zi Lu
said, "There are (there) common people and officers; there are the altars of the spirits of the land
and grain. Why must one read books before he can be considered to have learned?" The Master
said, "It is on this account that I hate your glib-tongued people."
11-26

Zi Lu, Zeng Xi, Ran You, and Gong Xi Hua were sitting by the Master. He said to them, "Though I
am a day or so older than you, do not think of that. From day to day you are saying, 'We are not
known.' If some ruler were to know you, what would you like to do?" Zi Lu hastily and lightly
replied, "Suppose the case of a state of ten thousand chariots; let it be straitened between other large
states; let it be suffering from invading armies; and to this let there be added a famine in corn and in
all vegetables - if I were intrusted with the government of it, in three years' time I could make the
people to be bold, and to recognize the rules of righteous conduct." The Master smiled at him.
Turning to Ran You, he said, "Qiu, what are your wishes?" Qiu replied, "Suppose a state of sixty or
seventy li square, or one of fifty or sixty, and let me have the government of it - in three years' time,
I could make plenty to abound among the people. As to teaching them the principles of propriety,
32

and music, I must wait for the rise of a superior man to do that." "What are your wishes, Chi," said
the Master next to Gong Xi Hua. Chi replied, "I do not say that my ability extends to these things,
but I should wish to learn them. At the services of the ancestral temple, and at the audiences of the
princes with the sovereign, I should like, dressed in the dark square-made robe and the black linen
cap, to act as a small assistant." Last of all, the Master asked Zeng Xi, "Dian, what are your
wishes?" Dian, pausing as he was playing on his lute, while it was yet twanging, laid the instrument
aside, and "My wishes," he said, "are different from the cherished purposes of these three
gentlemen." "What harm is there in that?" said the Master; "do you also, as well as they, speak out
your wishes." Dian then said, "In this, the last month of spring, with the dress of the season all
complete, along with five or six young men who have assumed the cap, and six or seven boys, I
would wash in the Yi, enjoy the breeze among the rain altars, and return home singing." The Master
heaved a sigh and said, "I give my approval to Dian." The three others having gone out, Zeng Xi
remained behind, and said, "What do you think of the words of these three friends?" The Master
replied, "They simply told each one his wishes." Xi pursued, "Master, why did you smile at You?"
He was answered, "The management of a state demands the rules of propriety. His words were not
humble; therefore I smiled at him." Xi again said, "But was it not a state which Qiu proposed for
himself?" The reply was, "Yes; did you ever see a territory of sixty or seventy li or one of fifty or
sixty, which was not a state?" Once more, Xi inquired, "And was it not a state which Chi proposed
for himself?" The Master again replied, "Yes; who but princes have to do with ancestral temples,
and with audiences but the sovereign? If Chi were to be a small assistant in these services, who
could be a great one?"

- Yan Yuan 12
12-1

Yan Yuan asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, "To subdue one's self and return to propriety,
is perfect virtue. If a man can for one day subdue himself and return to propriety, all under heaven
will ascribe perfect virtue to him. Is the practice of perfect virtue from a man himself, or is it from
others?" Yan Yuan said, "I beg to ask the steps of that process." The Master replied, "Look not at
what is contrary to propriety; listen not to what is contrary to propriety; speak not what is contrary
to propriety; make no movement which is contrary to propriety." Yan Yuan then said, "Though I am
deficient in intelligence and vigor, I will make it my business to practice this lesson."
12-2

Zhong Gong asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, "It is, when you go abroad, to behave to
every one as if you were receiving a great guest; to employ the people as if you were assisting at a
great sacrifice; not to do to others as you would not wish done to yourself; to have no murmuring
against you in the country, and none in the family." Zhong Gong said, "Though I am deficient in
intelligence and vigor, I will make it my business to practice this lesson."
12-3

Si Ma Niu asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, "The man of perfect virtue is cautious and
slow in his speech." "Cautious and slow in his speech!" said Niu, "is this what is meant by perfect
virtue?" The Master said, "When a man feels the difficulty of doing, can he be other than cautious
and slow in speaking?"
33

12-4

Si Ma Niu asked about the superior man. The Master said, "The superior man has neither anxiety
nor fear." "Being without anxiety or fear!" said Niu, "does this constitute what we call the superior
man?" The Master said, "When internal examination discovers nothing wrong, what is there to be
anxious about, what is there to fear?"
12-5

Si Ma Niu, full of anxiety, said, "Other men all have their brothers, I only have not." Zi Xia said to
him, "There is the following saying which I have heard - 'Death and life have their determined
appointment; riches and honors depend upon Heaven.' Let the superior man never fail reverentially
to order his own conduct, and let him be respectful to others and observant of propriety - then all
within the four seas will be his brothers. What has the superior man to do with being distressed
because he has no brothers?"
12-6

Zi Zhang asked what constituted intelligence. The Master said, "He with whom neither slander that
gradually soaks into the mind, nor statements that startle like a wound in the flesh, are successful,
may be called intelligent indeed. Yea, he with whom neither soaking slander, nor startling
statements, are successful, may be called farseeing."
12-7

Zi Gong asked about government. The Master said, "The requisites of government are that there be
sufficiency of food, sufficiency of military equipment, and the confidence of the people in their
ruler." Zi Gong said, "If it cannot be helped, and one of these must be dispensed with, which of the
three should be foregone first?" "The military equipment," said the Master. Zi Gong again asked, "If
it cannot be helped, and one of the remaining two must be dispensed with, which of them should be
foregone?" The Master answered, "Part with the food. From of old, death has been the lot of an
men; but if the people have no faith in their rulers, there is no standing for the state."
12-8

Ji Zi Cheng said, "In a superior man it is only the substantial qualities which are wanted; why
should we seek for ornamental accomplishments?" Zi Gong said, "Alas! Your words, sir, show you
to be a superior man, but four horses cannot overtake the tongue. Ornament is as substance;
substance is as ornament. The hide of a tiger or a leopard stripped of its hair, is like the hide of a
dog or a goat stripped of its hair."
12-9

The duke Ai inquired of You Ruo, saying, "The year is one of scarcity, and the returns for
expenditure are not sufficient - what is to be done?" You Ruo replied to him, "Why not simply tithe
the people?" "With two tenths," said the duke, "I find it not enough - how could I do with that
system of one tenth?" You Ruo answered, "If the people have plenty, their prince will not be left to
want alone. If the people are in want, their prince cannot enjoy plenty alone."
34

12-10

Zi Zhang having asked how virtue was to be exalted, and delusions to be discovered, the Master
said, "Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles, and be moving continually to what is right -
this is the way to exalt one's virtue. You love a man and wish him to live; you hate him and wish
him to die. Having wished him to live, you also wish him to die. This is a case of delusion. 'It may
not be on account of her being rich, yet you come to make a difference.'"
12-11

The duke Jing, of Qi, asked Confucius about government. Confucius replied, "There is government,
when the prince is prince, and the minister is minister; when the father is father, and the son is son."
"Good!" said the duke; "if, indeed, the prince be not prince, the minister not minister, the father not
father, and the son not son, although I have my revenue, can I enjoy it?"
12-12
The Master said, "Ah! it is You, who could with half a word settle litigations!" Zi Lu never slept
over a promise.
12-13
The Master said, "In hearing litigations, I am like any other body. What is necessary, however, is to
cause the people to have no litigations."
12-14
Zi Zhang asked about government. The Master said, "The art of governing is to keep its affairs
before the mind without weariness, and to practice them with undeviating consistency."
12-15
The Master said, "By extensively studying all learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of
the rules of propriety, one may thus likewise not err from what is right."
12-16
The Master said, "The superior man seeks to perfect the admirable qualities of men, and does not
seek to perfect their bad qualities. The mean man does the opposite of this."
12-17
Ji Kang asked Confucius about government. Confucius replied, "To govern means to rectify. If you
lead on the people with correctness, who will dare not to be correct?"
12-18
Ji Kang, distressed about the number of thieves in the state, inquired of Confucius how to do away
with them. Confucius said, "If you, sir, were not covetous, although you should reward them to do
it, they would not steal."
12-19

Ji Kang asked Confucius about government, saying, "What do you say to killing the unprincipled
for the good of the principled?" Confucius replied, "Sir, in carrying on your government, why
should you use killing at all? Let your evinced desires be for what is good, and the people will be
good. The relation between superiors and inferiors is like that between the wind and the grass. The
35

grass must bend, when the wind blows across it."
12-20

Zi Zhang asked, "What must the officer be, who may be said to be distinguished?" The Master said,
"What is it you call being distinguished?" Zi Zhang replied, "It is to be heard of through the state, to
be heard of throughout his clan." The Master said, "That is notoriety, not distinction. Now the man
of distinction is solid and straightforward, and loves righteousness. He examines people's words,
and looks at their countenances. He is anxious to humble himself to others. Such a man will be
distinguished in the country; he will be distinguished in his clan. As to the man of notoriety, he
assumes the appearance of virtue, but his actions are opposed to it, and he rests in this character
without any doubts about himself. Such a man will be heard of in the country; he will be heard of in
the clan."
12-21

Fan Chi rambling with the Master under the trees about the rain altars, said, "I venture to ask how to
exalt virtue, to correct cherished evil, and to discover delusions." The Master said, "Truly a good
question! If doing what is to be done be made the first business, and success a secondary
consideration - is not this the way to exalt virtue? To assail one's own wickedness and not assail that
of others - is not this the way to correct cherished evil? For a morning's anger to disregard one's
own life, and involve that of his parents - is not this a case of delusion?"
12-22

Fan Chi asked about benevolence. The Master said, "It is to love all men." He asked about
knowledge. The Master said, "It is to know all men." Fan Chi did not immediately understand these
answers. The Master said, "Employ the upright and put aside all the crooked; in this way the
crooked can be made to be upright." Fan Chi retired, and, seeing Zi Xia, he said to him, "A Little
while ago, I had an interview with our Master, and asked him about knowledge. He said, 'Employ
the upright, and put aside all the crooked; in this way, the crooked will be made to be upright.' What
did he mean?" Zi Xia said, "Truly rich is his saying! Shun, being in possession of the kingdom,
selected from among all the people, and employed Gao Yao, on which all who were devoid of virtue
disappeared. Tang, being in possession of the kingdom, selected from among all the people, and
employed Yi Yin, and all who were devoid of virtue disappeared."
12-23
Zi Gong asked about friendship. The Master said, "Faithfully admonish your friend, and skillfully
lead him on. If you find him impracticable, stop. Do not disgrace yourself."
12-24
The philosopher Zeng said, "The superior man on grounds of culture meets with his friends, and by
friendship helps his virtue."

- Zi Lu 13
36

13-1
Zi Lu asked about government. The Master said, "Go before the people with your example, and be
laborious in their affairs." He requested further instruction, and was answered, "Be not weary (in
these things)."
13-2

Zhong Gong, being chief minister to the head of the Ji family, asked about government. The Master
said, "Employ first the services of your various officers, pardon small faults, and raise to office men
of virtue and talents." Zhong Gong said, "How shall I know the men of virtue and talent, so that I
may raise them to office?" He was answered, "Raise to office those whom you know. As to those
whom you do not know, will others neglect them?"
13-3

Zi Lu said, "The ruler of Wei has been waiting for you, in order with you to administer the
government. What will you consider the first thing to be done?" The Master replied, "What is
necessary is to rectify names." "So! indeed!" said Zi Lu. "You are wide of the mark! Why must
there be such rectification?" The Master said, "How uncultivated you are, You! A superior man, in
regard to what he does not know, shows a cautious reserve. If names be not correct, language is not
in accordance with the truth of things. If language be not in accordance with the truth of things,
affairs cannot be carried on to success. When affairs cannot be carried on to success, proprieties and
music will not flourish. When proprieties and music do not flourish, punishments will not be
properly awarded. When punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know how to
move hand or foot. Therefore a superior man considers it necessary that the names he uses may be
spoken appropriately, and also that what he speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the
superior man requires is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect."
13-4

Fan Chi requested to be taught husbandry. The Master said, "I am not so good for that as an old
husbandman." He requested also to be taught gardening, and was answered, "I am not so good for
that as an old gardener." Fan Chi having gone out, the Master said, "A small man, indeed, is Fan
Xu! If a superior man love propriety, the people will not dare not to be reverent. If he love
righteousness, the people will not dare not to submit to his example. If he love good faith, the
people will not dare not to be sincere. Now, when these things obtain, the people from all quarters
will come to him, bearing their children on their backs - what need has he of a knowledge of
husbandry?"
13-5
The Master said, "Though a man may be able to recite the three hundred odes, yet if, when intrusted
with a governmental charge, he knows not how to act, or if, when sent to any quarter on a mission,
he cannot give his replies unassisted, notwithstanding the extent of his learning, of what practical
use is it?"
13-6
The Master said, "When a prince's personal conduct is correct, his government is effective without
37

the issuing of orders. If his personal conduct is not correct, he may issue orders, but they will not be
followed."
13-7
The Master said, "The governments of Lu and Wei are brothers."
13-8

The Master said of Jing, a scion of the ducal family of Wei, that he knew the economy of a family
well. When he began to have means, he said, "Ha! here is a collection!" When they were a little
increased, he said, "Ha! this is complete!" When he had become rich, he said, "Ha! this is
admirable!"
13-9

When the Master went to Wei, Zan You acted as driver of his carriage. The Master observed, "How
numerous are the people!" You said, "Since they are thus numerous, what more shall be done for
them?" "Enrich them," was the reply. "And when they have been enriched, what more shall be
done?" The Master said, "Teach them."
13-10
The Master said, "If there were (any of the princes) who would employ me, in the course of twelve
months, I should have done something considerable. In three years, the government would be
perfected."
13-11
The Master said, "'If good men were to govern a country in succession for a hundred years, they
would be able to transform the violently bad, and dispense with capital punishments.' True indeed is
this saying!"
13-12
The Master said, "If a truly royal ruler were to arise, it would still require a generation, and then
virtue would prevail."
13-13
The Master said, "If a minister make his own conduct correct, what difficulty will he have in
assisting in government? If he cannot rectify himself, what has he to do with rectifying others?"
13-14

The disciple Ran returning from the court, the Master said to him, "How are you so late?" He
replied, "We had government business." The Master said, "It must have been family affairs. If there
had been government business, though I am not now in office, I should have been consulted about
it."
13-15

The Duke Ding asked whether there was a single sentence which could make a country prosperous.
38

Confucius replied, "Such an effect cannot be expected from one sentence. There is a saying,
however, which people have - 'To be a prince is difficult; to be a minister is not easy.' If a ruler
knows this - the difficulty of being a prince - may there not be expected from this one sentence the
prosperity of his country?" The duke then said, "Is there a single sentence which can ruin a
country?" Confucius replied, "Such an effect as that cannot be expected from one sentence. There
is, however, the saying which people have - 'I have no pleasure in being a prince, but only in that no
one can offer any opposition to what I say!' If a ruler's words be good, is it not also good that no one
oppose them? But if they are not good, and no one opposes them, may there not be expected from
this one sentence the ruin of his country?"
13-16
The duke of She asked about government. The Master said, "Good government obtains, when those
who are near are made happy, and those who are far off are attracted."
13-17

Zi Xia, being governor of Ju Fu, asked about government. The Master said, "Do not be desirous to
have things done quickly; do not look at small advantages. Desire to have things done quickly
prevents their being done thoroughly. Looking at small advantages prevents great affairs from being
accomplished."
13-18

The Duke of She informed Confucius, saying, "Among us here there are those who may be styled
upright in their conduct. If their father have stolen a sheep, they will bear witness to the fact."
Confucius said, "Among us, in our part of the country, those who are upright are different from this.
The father conceals the misconduct of the son, and the son conceals the misconduct of the father.
Uprightness is to be found in this."
13-19
Fan Chi asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, "It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave; in the
management of business, to be reverently attentive; in intercourse with others, to be strictly sincere.
Though a man go among rude, uncultivated tribes, these qualities may not be neglected."
13-20

Zi Gong asked, saying, "What qualities must a man possess to entitle him to be called an officer?
The Master said, "He who in his conduct of himself maintains a sense of shame, and when sent to
any quarter will not disgrace his prince's commission, deserves to be called an officer." Zi Gong
pursued, "I venture to ask who may be placed in the next lower rank?" And he was told, "He whom
the circle of his relatives pronounce to be filial, whom his fellow villagers and neighbors pronounce
to be fraternal." Again the disciple asked, "I venture to ask about the class still next in order." The
Master said, "They are determined to be sincere in what they say, and to carry out what they do.
They are obstinate little men. Yet perhaps they may make the next class." Zi Gong finally inquired,
"Of what sort are those of the present day, who engage in government?" The Master said "Pooh!
they are so many pecks and hampers, not worth being taken into account."
13-21
39

The Master said, "Since I cannot get men pursuing the due medium, to whom I might communicate
my instructions, I must find the ardent and the cautiously-decided. The ardent will advance and lay
hold of truth; the cautiously-decided will keep themselves from what is wrong."
13-22

The Master said, "The people of the south have a saying - 'A man without constancy cannot be
either a wizard or a doctor.' Good! Inconstant in his virtue, he will be visited with disgrace." The
Master said, "This arises simply from not attending to the prognostication."
13-23
The Master said, "The superior man is affable, but not adulatory; the mean man is adulatory, but not
affable."
13-24

Zi Gong asked, saying, "What do you say of a man who is loved by all the people of his
neighborhood?" The Master replied, "We may not for that accord our approval of him." "And what
do you say of him who is hated by all the people of his neighborhood?" The Master said, "We may
not for that conclude that he is bad. It is better than either of these cases that the good in the
neighborhood love him, and the bad hate him."
13-25

The Master said, "The superior man is easy to serve and difficult to please. If you try to please him
in any way which is not accordant with right, he will not be pleased. But in his employment of men,
he uses them according to their capacity. The mean man is difficult to serve, and easy to please. If
you try to please him, though it be in a way which is not accordant with right, he may be pleased.
But in his employment of men, he wishes them to be equal to everything."
13-26
The Master said, "The superior man has a dignified ease without pride. The mean man has pride
without a dignified ease."
13-27
The Master said, "The firm, the enduring, the simple, and the modest are near to virtue."
13-28

Zi Lu asked, saying, "What qualities must a man possess to entitle him to be called a scholar?" The
Master said, "He must be thus: earnest, urgent, and bland - among his friends, earnest and urgent;
among his brethren, bland."
13-29
The Master said, "Let a good man teach the people seven years, and they may then likewise be
employed in war."
13-30
The Master said, "To lead an uninstructed people to war, is to throw them away."
40

- Xian Wen 14
14-1

Xian asked what was shameful. The Master said, "When good government prevails in a state, to be
thinking only of salary; and, when bad government prevails, to be thinking, in the same way, only
of salary - this is shameful." "When the love of superiority, boasting, resentments, and covetousness
are repressed, this may be deemed perfect virtue." The Master said, "This may be regarded as the
achievement of what is difficult. But I do not know that it is to be deemed perfect virtue."
14-2
The Master said, "The scholar who cherishes the love of comfort is not fit to be deemed a scholar."
14-3
The Master said, "When good government prevails in a state, language may be lofty and bold, and
actions the same. When bad government prevails, the actions may be lofty and bold, but the
language may be with some reserve."
14-4
The Master said, "The virtuous will be sure to speak correctly, but those whose speech is good may
not always be virtuous. Men of principle are sure to be bold, but those who are bold may not always
be men of principle."
14-5

Nan Gong Kuo, submitting an inquiry to Confucius, said, "Yi was skilful at archery, and Ao could
move a boat along upon the land, but neither of them died a natural death. Yu and Ji personally
wrought at the toils of husbandry, and they became possessors of the kingdom." The Master made
no reply; but when Nan Gong Kuo went out, he said, "A superior man indeed is this! An esteemer of
virtue indeed is this!"
14-6
The Master said, "Superior men, and yet not always virtuous, there have been, alas! But there never
has been a mean man, and, at the same time, virtuous."
14-7
The Master said, "Can there be love which does not lead to strictness with its object? Can there be
loyalty which does not lead to the instruction of its object?"
14-8
The Master said, "In preparing the governmental notifications, Pi Shen first made the rough draft;
Shi Shu examined and discussed its contents; Zi Yu, the manager of foreign intercourse, then
polished the style; and, finally, Zi Chan of Dong Li gave it the proper elegance and finish."
14-9

Some one asked about Zi Chan. The Master said, "He was a kind man." He asked about Zi Xi. The
Master said, "That man! That man!" He asked about Guan Zhong. "For him," said the Master, "the
city of Pian, with three hundred families, was taken from the chief of the Bo family, who did not
utter a murmuring word, though, to the end of his life, he had only coarse rice to eat."
41

14-10
The Master said, "To be poor without murmuring is difficult. To be rich without being proud is
easy."
14-11
The Master said, "Meng Gong Chuo is more than fit to be chief officer in the families of Zhao and
Wei, but he is not fit to be great officer to either of the States Teng or Xue."
14-12

Zi Lu asked what constituted a COMPLETE man. The Master said, "Suppose a man with the
knowledge of Zang Wu Zhong, the freedom from covetousness of Gong Chuo, the bravery of
Zhuang of Bian, and the varied talents of Ran Qiu; add to these the accomplishments of the rules of
propriety and music - such a one might be reckoned a COMPLETE man." He then added, "But
what is the necessity for a complete man of the present day to have all these things? The man, who
in the view of gain, thinks of righteousness; who in the view of danger is prepared to give up his
life; and who does not forget an old agreement however far back it extends - such a man may be
reckoned a COMPLETE man."
14-13

The Master asked Gong Ming Jia about Gong Ming Wen, saying, "Is it true that your master speaks
not, laughs not, and takes not?" Gong Ming Jia replied, "This has arisen from the reporters going
beyond the truth. My master speaks when it is the time to speak, and so men do not get tired of his
speaking. He laughs when there is occasion to be joyful, and so men do not get tired of his laughing.
He takes when it is consistent with righteousness to do so, and so men do not get tired of his
taking." The Master said, "So! But is it so with him?"
14-14
The Master said, "Zang Wu Zhong, keeping possession of Fang, asked of the duke of Lu to appoint
a successor to him in his family. Although it may be said that he was not using force with his
sovereign, I believe he was."
14-15
The Master said, "The duke Wen of Jin was crafty and not upright. The duke Huan of Qi was
upright and not crafty."
14-16

Zi Lu said, "The duke Huan caused his brother Jiu to be killed, when Shao Hu died with his master,
but Guan Zhong did not die. May not I say that he was wanting in virtue?" The Master said, "The
Duke Huan assembled all the princes together, and that not with weapons of war and chariots - it
was all through the influence of Guan Zhong. Whose beneficence was like his? Whose beneficence
was like his?"
14-17

42

Zi Gong said, "Guan Zhong, I apprehend, was wanting in virtue. When the Duke Huan caused his
brother Jiu to be killed, Guan Zhong was not able to die with him. Moreover, he became prime
minister to Huan." The Master said, "Guan Zhong acted as prime minister to the duke Huan, made
him leader of all the princes, and united and rectified the whole kingdom. Down to the present day,
the people enjoy the gifts which he conferred. But for Guan Zhong, we should now be wearing our
hair unbound, and the lappets of our coats buttoning on the left side. Will you require from him the
small fidelity of common men and common women, who would commit suicide in a stream or
ditch, no one knowing anything about them?"
14-18
The great officer, Xian, who had been family minister to Gong Ming Wen, ascended to the prince's
court in company with Wen. The Master, having heard of it, said, "He deserved to be considered
WEN (the accomplished)."
14-19

The Master was speaking about the unprincipled course of the duke Ling of Wei, when Qi Kang
said, "Since he is of such a character, how is it he does not lose his state?" Confucius said, "The
Zhong Shu Yu has the superintendence of his guests and of strangers; the litanist, Tuo, has the
management of his ancestral temple; and Wang Sun Jia has the direction of the army and forces -
with such officers as these, how should he lose his state?"
14-20
The Master said, "He who speaks without modesty will find it difficult to make his words good."
14-21

Chen Cheng murdered the duke Jian of Qi. Confucius bathed, went to court and informed the duke
Ai, saying, "Chen Heng has slain his sovereign. I beg that you will undertake to punish him." The
duke said, "Inform the chiefs of the three families of it." Confucius retired, and said, "Following in
the rear of the great officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter, and my prince says,
'Inform the chiefs of the three families of it.'" He went to the chiefs, and informed them, but they
would not act. Confucius then said, "Following in the rear of the great officers, I did not dare not to
represent such a matter."
14-22
Zi Lu asked how a ruler should be served. The Master said, "Do not impose on him, and, moreover,
withstand him to his face."
14-23
The Master said, "The progress of the superior man is upwards; the progress of the mean man is
downwards."
14-24
The Master said, "In ancient times, men learned with a view to their own improvement. Nowadays,
men learn with a view to the approbation of others."
14-25
43

Qu Bo sent a messenger with friendly inquiries to Confucius. Confucius sat with him, and
questioned him. "What," said he! "is your master engaged in?" The messenger replied, "My master
is anxious to make his faults few, but he has not yet succeeded." He then went out, and the Master
said, "A messenger indeed! A messenger indeed!"
14-26
The Master said, "He who is not in any particular office has nothing to do with plans for the
administration of its duties." The philosopher Zeng said, "The superior man, in his thoughts, does
not go out of his place."
14-27
The Master said, "The superior man is modest in his speech, but exceeds in his actions."
14-28

The Master said, "The way of the superior man is threefold, but I am not equal to it. Virtuous, he is
free from anxieties; wise, he is free from perplexities; bold, he is free from fear." Zi Gong said,
"Master, that is what you yourself say."
14-29
Zi Gong was in the habit of comparing men together. The Master said, "Ci must have reached a high
pitch of excellence! Now, I have not leisure for this."
14-30
The Master said, "I will not be concerned at men's not knowing me; I will be concerned at my own
want of ability."
14-31
The Master said, "He who does not anticipate attempts to deceive him, nor think beforehand of his
not being believed, and yet apprehends these things readily (when they occur) - is he not a man of
superior worth?"
14-32

Wei Sheng Mu said to Confucius, "Qiu, how is it that you keep roosting about? Is it not that you are
an insinuating talker? Confucius said, "I do not dare to play the part of such a talker, but I hate
obstinacy."
14-33
The Master said, "A horse is called a Ji, not because of its strength, but because of its other good
qualities."
14-34
Some one said, "What do you say concerning the principle that injury should be recompensed with
kindness?" The Master said, "With what then will you recompense kindness? Recompense injury
with justice, and recompense kindness with kindness."
14-35

44

The Master said, "Alas! there is no one that knows me." Zi Gong said, "What do you mean by thus
saying - that no one knows you?" The Master replied, "I do not murmur against Heaven. I do not
grumble against men. My studies lie low, and my penetration rises high. But there is Heaven - that
knows me!"
14-36

The Gong Bo Liao, having slandered Zi Lu to Ji Sun, Zi Fu Jing Bo informed Confucius of it,
saying, "Our master is certainly being led astray by the Gong Bo Liao, but I have still power enough
left to cut Liao off, and expose his corpse in the market and in the court." The Master said, "If my
principles are to advance, it is so ordered. If they are to fall to the ground, it is so ordered. What can
the Gong Bo Liao do where such ordering is concerned?"
14-37
The Master said, "Some men of worth retire from the world. Some retire from particular states.
Some retire because of disrespectful looks. Some retire because of contradictory language." The
Master said, "Those who have done this are seven men."
14-38

Zi Lu happening to pass the night in Shi Men, the gatekeeper said to him, "Whom do you come
from?" Zi Lu said, "From Mr. Kong." "It is he, is it not?" said the other, "who knows the
impracticable nature of the times and yet will be doing in them."
14-39

The Master was playing, one day, on a musical stone in Wei, when a man, carrying a straw basket,
passed door of the house where Confucius was, and said, "His heart is full who so beats the musical
stone." A little while after, he added, "How contemptible is the one-ideaed obstinacy those sounds
display! When one is taken no notice of, he has simply at once to give over his wish for public
employment. 'Deep water must be crossed with the clothes on; shallow water may be crossed with
the clothes held up.'" The Master said, "How determined is he in his purpose! But this is not
difficult!"
14-40

Zi Zhang said, "What is meant when the Shu says that Gao Zong, while observing the usual
imperial mourning, was for three years without speaking?" The Master said, "Why must Gao Zong
be referred to as an example of this? The ancients all did so. When the sovereign died, the officers
all attended to their several duties, taking instructions from the prime minister for three years."
14-41
The Master said, "When rulers love to observe the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to
the calls on them for service."
14-42

Zi Lu asked what constituted the superior man. The Master said, "The cultivation of himself in
reverential carefulness." "And is this all?" said Zi Lu. "He cultivates himself so as to give rest to
others," was the reply. "And is this all?" again asked Zi Lu. The Master said, "He cultivates himself
45

so as to give rest to all the people. He cultivates himself so as to give rest to all the people - even
Yao and Shun were still solicitous about this."
14-43
Yuan Rang was squatting on his heels, and so waited the approach of the Master, who said to him,
"In youth not humble as befits a junior; in manhood, doing nothing worthy of being handed down;
and living on to old age - this is to be a pest." With this he hit him on the shank with his staff.
14-44

A youth of the village of Que was employed by Confucius to carry the messages between him and
his visitors. Some one asked about him, saying, "I suppose he has made great progress." The Master
said, "I observe that he is fond of occupying the seat of a full-grown man; I observe that he walks
shoulder to shoulder with his elders. He is not one who is seeking to make progress in learning. He
wishes quickly to become a man."

- Wei Ling Gong 15
15-1

The duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius about tactics. Confucius replied, "I have heard all about
sacrificial vessels, but I have not learned military matters." On this, he took his departure the next
day.
15-2

When he was in Chen, their provisions were exhausted, and his followers became so ill that they
were unable to rise. Zi Lu, with evident dissatisfaction, said, "Has the superior man likewise to
endure in this way?" The Master said, "The superior man may indeed have to endure want, but the
mean man, when he is in want, gives way to unbridled license."
15-3

The Master said, "Ci, you think, I suppose, that I am one who learns many things and keeps them in
memory?" Zi Gong replied, "Yes - but perhaps it is not so?" "No," was the answer; "I seek a unity
all pervading."
15-4
The Master said, "You, those who know virtue are few."
15-5
The Master said, "May not Shun be instanced as having governed efficiently without exertion?
What did he do? He did nothing but gravely and reverently occupy his royal seat."
15-6

Zi Zhang asked how a man should conduct himself, so as to be everywhere appreciated. The Master
said, "Let his words be sincere and truthful and his actions honorable and careful - such conduct
may be practiced among the rude tribes of the South or the North. If his words be not sincere and
truthful, and his actions not honorable and careful, will he, with such conduct, be appreciated, even
46

in his neighborhood? When he is standing, let him see those two things, as it were, fronting him.
When he is in a carriage, let him see them attached to the yoke. Then may he subsequently carry
them into practice."Zi Zhang wrote these counsels on the end of his sash.
15-7

The Master said, "Truly straightforward was the historiographer Yu. When good government
prevailed in his state, he was like an arrow. When bad government prevailed, he was like an arrow.
A superior man indeed is Qu Bo Yu! When good government prevails in his state, he is to be found
in office. When bad government prevails, he can roll his principles up, and keep them in his breast."
15-8

The Master said, "When a man may be spoken with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the
man. When a man may not be spoken with, to speak to him is to err in reference to our words. The
wise err neither in regard to their man nor to their words."
15-9
The Master said, "The determined scholar and the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense
of injuring their virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue complete."
15-10

Zi Gong asked about the practice of virtue. The Master said, "The mechanic, who wishes to do his
work well, must first sharpen his tools. When you are living in any state, take service with the most
worthy among its great officers, and make friends of the most virtuous among its scholars."
15-11

Yan Yuan asked how the government of a country should be administered. The Master said, "Follow
the seasons of Xia. Ride in the state carriage of Yin. Wear the ceremonial cap of Zhou. Let the
music be the Shao with its pantomimes. Banish the songs of Zheng, and keep far from specious
talkers. The songs of Zheng are licentious; specious talkers are dangerous."
15-12
The Master said, "If a man take no thought about what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand."
15-13
The Master said, "It is all over! I have not seen one who loves virtue as he loves beauty."
15-14
The Master said, "Was not Zang Wen like one who had stolen his situation? He knew the virtue and
the talents of Hui of Liu Xia, and yet did not procure that he should stand with him in court."
15-15
The Master said, "He who requires much from himself and little from others, will keep himself
from being the object of resentment."
15-16
The Master said, "When a man is not in the habit of saying, 'What shall I think of this? What shall I
47

think of this?' I can indeed do nothing with him!"
15-17
The Master said, "When a number of people are together, for a whole day, without their
conversation turning on righteousness, and when they are fond of carrying out the suggestions of a
small shrewdness; theirs is indeed a hard case."
15-18
The Master said, "The superior man in everything considers righteousness to be essential. He
performs it according to the rules of propriety. He brings it forth in humility. He completes it with
sincerity. This is indeed a superior man."
15-19
The Master said, "The superior man is distressed by his want of ability. He is not distressed by
men's not knowing him."
15-20
The Master said, "The superior man dislikes the thought of his name not being mentioned after his
death."
15-21
The Master said, "What the superior man seeks, is in himself. What the mean man seeks, is in
others."
15-22
The Master said, "The superior man is dignified, but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a
partisan."
15-23
The Master said, "The superior man does not promote a man simply on account of his words, nor
does he put aside good words because of the man."
15-24

Zi Gong asked, saying, "Is there one word which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's life?"
The Master said, "Is not RECIPROCITY such a word? What you do not want done to yourself, do
not do to others."
15-25

The Master said, "In my dealings with men, whose evil do I blame, whose goodness do I praise,
beyond what is proper? If I do sometimes exceed in praise, there must be ground for it in my
examination of the individual. This people supplied the ground why the three dynasties pursued the
path of straightforwardness."
15-26
The Master said, "Even in my early days, a historiographer would leave a blank in his text, and he
who had a horse would lend him to another to ride. Now, alas! there are no such things."
15-27
48

The Master said, "Specious words confound virtue. Want of forbearance in small matters confounds
great plans."
15-28
The Master said, "When the multitude hate a man, it is necessary to examine into the case. When
the multitude like a man, it is necessary to examine into the case."
15-29
The Master said, "A man can enlarge the principles which he follows; those principles do not
enlarge the man."
15-30
The Master said, "To have faults and not to reform them - this, indeed, should be pronounced
having faults."
15-31
The Master said, "I have been the whole day without eating, and the whole night without sleeping;
occupied with thinking. It was of no use. The better plan is to learn."
15-32

The Master said, "The object of the superior man is truth. Food is not his object. There is plowing -
even in that there is sometimes want. So with learning - emolument may be found in it. The superior
man is anxious lest he should not get truth; he is not anxious lest poverty should come upon him."
15-33

The Master said, "When a man's knowledge is sufficient to attain, and his virtue is not sufficient to
enable him to hold, whatever he may have gained, he will lose again. When his knowledge is
sufficient to attain, and he has virtue enough to hold fast, if he cannot govern with dignity, the
people will not respect him. When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has virtue enough to
hold fast; when he governs also with dignity, yet if he try to move the people contrary to the rules of
propriety - full excellence is not reached."
15-34
The Master said, "The superior man cannot be known in little matters; but he may be intrusted with
great concerns. The small man may not be intrusted with great concerns, but he may be known in
little matters."
15-35
The Master said, "Virtue is more to man than either water or fire. I have seen men die from treading
on water and fire, but I have never seen a man die from treading the course of virtue."
15-36
The Master said, "Let every man consider virtue as what devolves on himself. He may not yield the
performance of it even to his teacher."
15-37
The Master said, "The superior man is correctly firm, and not firm merely."
49

15-38
The Master said, "A minister, in serving his prince, reverently discharges his duties, and makes his
emolument a secondary consideration."
15-39
The Master said, "In teaching there should be no distinction of classes."
15-40
The Master said, "Those whose courses are different cannot lay plans for one another."
15-41
The Master said, "In language it is simply required that it convey the meaning."
15-42

The music master, Mian, having called upon him, when they came to the steps, the Master said,
"Here are the steps." When they came to the mat for the guest to sit upon, he said, "Here is the mat."
When all were seated, the Master informed him, saying, "So and so is here; so and so is here." The
music master, Mian, having gone out, Zi Zhang asked, saying. "Is it the rule to tell those things to
the music master?" The Master said, "Yes. This is certainly the rule for those who lead the blind."

- Ji Shi 16
16-1

The head of the Ji family was going to attack Zhuan Yu. Ran You and Ji Lu had an interview with
Confucius, and said, "Our chief, Ji, is going to commence operations against Zhuan Yu." Confucius
said, "Qiu, is it not you who are in fault here? Now, in regard to Zhuan Yu, long ago, a former king
appointed its ruler to preside over the sacrifices to the eastern Mang; moreover, it is in the midst of
the territory of our state; and its ruler is a minister in direct connection with the sovereign - What
has your chief to do with attacking it?" Ran You said, "Our master wishes the thing; neither of us
two ministers wishes it." Confucius said, "Qiu, there are the words of Zhou Ren, 'When he can put
forth his ability, he takes his place in the ranks of office; when he finds himself unable to do so, he
retires from it. How can he be used as a guide to a blind man, who does not support him when
tottering, nor raise him up when fallen?' And further, you speak wrongly. When a tiger or rhinoceros
escapes from his cage; when a tortoise or piece of jade is injured in its repository - whose is the
fault?" Ran You said, "But at present, Zhuan Yu is strong and near to Fei; if our chief do not now
take it, it will hereafter be a sorrow to his descendants." Confucius said. "Qiu, the superior man
hates those declining to say 'I want such and such a thing,' and framing explanations for their
conduct. I have heard that rulers of states and chiefs of families are not troubled lest their people
should be few, but are troubled lest they should not keep their several places; that they are not
troubled with fears of poverty, but are troubled with fears of a want of contented repose among the
people in their several places. For when the people keep their several places, there will be no
50

poverty; when harmony prevails, there will be no scarcity of people; and when there is such a
contented repose, there will be no rebellious upsettings. So it is. Therefore, if remoter people are not
submissive, all the influences of civil culture and virtue are to be cultivated to attract them to be so;
and when they have been so attracted, they must be made contented and tranquil. Now, here are
you, You and Qiu, assisting your chief. Remoter people are not submissive, and, with your help, he
cannot attract them to him. In his own territory there are divisions and downfalls, leavings and
separations, and, with your help, he cannot preserve it. And yet he is planning these hostile
movements within the state. I am afraid that the sorrow of the Ji Sun family will not be on account
of Zhuan Yu, but will be found within the screen of their own court."
16-2

Confucius said, "When good government prevails in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive
military expeditions proceed from the son of Heaven. When bad government prevails in the empire,
ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions proceed from the princes. When these things
proceed from the princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose their power in
ten generations. When they proceed from the great officers of the princes, as a rule, the case will be
few in which they do not lose their power in five generations. When the subsidiary ministers of the
great officers hold in their grasp the orders of the state, as a rule the cases will be few in which they
do not lose their power in three generations. When right principles prevail in the kingdom,
government will not be in the hands of the great officers. When right principles prevail in the
kingdom, there will be no discussions among the common people."
16-3
Confucius said, "The revenue of the state has left the ducal house now for five generations. The
government has been in the hands of the great officers for four generations. On this account, the
descendants of the three Huan are much reduced."
16-4

Confucius said, "There are three friendships which are advantageous, and three which are injurious.
Friendship with the uplight; friendship with the sincere; and friendship with the man of much
observation - these are advantageous. Friendship with the man of specious airs; friendship with the
insinuatingly soft; and friendship with the glib-tongued - these are injurious."
16-5

Confucius said, "There are three things men find enjoyment in which are advantageous, and three
things they find enjoyment in which are injurious. To find enjoyment in the discriminating study of
ceremonies and music; to find enjoyment in speaking of the goodness of others; to find enjoyment
in having many worthy friends - these are advantageous. To find enjoyment in extravagant
pleasures; to find enjoyment in idleness and sauntering; to find enjoyment in the pleasures of
feasting - these are injurious."
16-6

Confucius said, "There are three errors to which they who stand in the presence of a man of virtue
and station are liable. They may speak when it does not come to them to speak - this is called
rashness. They may not speak when it comes to them to speak - this is called concealment. They
51

may speak without looking at the countenance of their superior - this is called blindness."
16-7

Confucius said, "There are three things which the superior man guards against. In youth, when the
physical powers are not yet settled, he guards against lust. When he is strong and the physical
powers are full of vigor, he guards against quarrelsomeness. When he is old, and the animal powers
are decayed, he guards against covetousness."
16-8

Confucius said, "There are three things of which the superior man stands in awe. He stands in awe
of the ordinances of Heaven. He stands in awe of great men. He stands in awe of the words of
sages. The mean man does not know the ordinances of Heaven, and consequently does not stand in
awe of them. He is disrespectful to great men. He makes sport of the words of sages."
16-9

Confucius said, "Those who are born with the possession of knowledge are the highest class of
men. Those who learn, and so, readily, get possession of knowledge, are the next. Those who are
dull and stupid, and yet compass the learning, are another class next to these. As to those who are
dull and stupid and yet do not learn - they are the lowest of the people."
16-10

Confucius said, "The superior man has nine things which are subjects with him of thoughtful
consideration. In regard to the use of his eyes, he is anxious to see clearly. In regard to the use of his
ears, he is anxious to hear distinctly. In regard to his countenance, he is anxious that it should be
benign. In regard to his demeanor, he is anxious that it should be respectful. In regard to his speech,
he is anxious that it should be sincere. In regard to his doing of business, he is anxious that it should
be reverently careful. In regard to what he doubts about, he is anxious to question others. When he
is angry, he thinks of the difficulties (his anger may involve him in). When he sees gain to be got, he
thinks of righteousness."
16-11

Confucius said, "Contemplating good, and pursuing it, as if they could not reach it; contemplating
evil and shrinking from it, as they would from thrusting the hand into boiling water - I have seen
such men, as I have heard such words. Living in retirement to study their aims, and practicing
righteousness to carry out their principles - I have heard these words, but I have not seen such men."
16-12

The Duke Jing of Qi had a thousand teams, each of four horses, but on the day of his death, the
people did not praise him for a single virtue. Bo Yi and Shu Qi died of hunger at the foot of the
Shou Yang mountain, and the people, down to the present time, praise them. Is not that saying
illustrated by this?
16-13

52

Chen Kang asked Bo Yu, saying, "Have you heard any lessons from your father different from what
we have all heard?" Bo Yu replied, "No. He was standing alone once, when I passed below the hall
with hasty steps, and said to me, 'Have you learned the Odes?' On my replying 'Not yet,' he added,
'If you do not learn the Odes, you will not be fit to converse with.' I retired and studied the Odes.
Another day, he was in the same way standing alone, when I passed by below the hall with hasty
steps, and said to me, 'Have you learned the rules of Propriety?' On my replying 'Not yet,' he added,
'If you do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character cannot be established.' I then retired, and
learned the rules of Propriety. I have heard only these two things from him." Chen Kang retired,
and, quite delighted, said, "I asked one thing, and I have got three things. I have heard about the
Odes. I have heard about the rules of Propriety. I have also heard that the superior man maintains a
distant reserve towards his son."
16-14

The wife of the prince of a state is called by him "fu ren". She calls herself "xiao tong". The people
of the state call her "jun fu ren", and, to the people of other states, they call her "gua xiao jun". The
people of other states also call her "jun fu ren".

- Yang Huo 17
17-1

Yang Huo wished to see Confucius, but Confucius would not go to see him. On this, he sent a
present of a pig to Confucius, who, having chosen a time when Huo was not at home, went to pay
his respects for the gift. He met him, however, on the way. Huo said to Confucius, "Come, let me
speak with you." He then asked, "Can he be called benevolent who keeps his jewel in his bosom,
and leaves his country to confusion?" Confucius replied, "No." "Can he be called wise, who is
anxious to be engaged in public employment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity of being
so?" Confucius again said, "No." "The days and months are passing away; the years do not wait for
us." Confucius said, "Right; I will go into office."
17-2
The Master said, "By nature, men are nearly alike; by practice, they get to be wide apart."
17-3
The Master said, "There are only the wise of the highest class, and the stupid of the lowest class,
who cannot be changed."
17-4

The Master, having come to Wu Cheng, heard there the sound of stringed instruments and singing.
Well pleased and smiling, he said, "Why use an ox knife to kill a fowl?" Zi You replied, "Formerly,
Master, I heard you say, 'When the man of high station is well instructed, he loves men; when the
man of low station is well instructed, he is easily ruled.'" The Master said, "My disciples, Yan's
words are right. What I said was only in sport."
53

17-5

Gong Shan Fo Rao, when he was holding Fei, and in an attitude of rebellion, invited the Master to
visit him, who was rather inclined to go. Zi Lu was displeased. and said, "Indeed, you cannot go!
Why must you think of going to see Gong Shan?" The Master said, "Can it be without some reason
that he has invited me? If any one employ me, may I not make an eastern Zhou?"
17-6

Zi Zhang asked Confucius about perfect virtue. Confucius said, "To be able to practice five things
everywhere under heaven constitutes perfect virtue." He begged to ask what they were, and was
told, "Gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity, earnestness, and kindness. If you are grave, you will not
be treated with disrespect. If you are generous, you will win all. If you are sincere, people will
repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you will accomplish much. If you are kind, this will enable
you to employ the services of others."
17-7

Fo Xi inviting him to visit him, the Master was inclined to go. Zi Lu said, "Master, formerly I have
heard you say, 'When a man in his own person is guilty of doing evil, a superior man will not
associate with him.' Fo Xi is in rebellion, holding possession of Zhong Mou; if you go to him, what
shall be said?" The Master said, "Yes, I did use these words. But is it not said, that, if a thing be
really hard, it may be ground without being made thin? Is it not said, that, if a thing be really white,
it may be steeped in a dark fluid without being made black? Am I a bitter gourd? How can I be hung
up out of the way of being eaten?"
17-8

The Master said, "You, have you heard the six words to which are attached six becloudings?" You
replied, "I have not." "Sit down, and I will tell them to you. There is the love of being benevolent
without the love of learning - the beclouding here leads to a foolish simplicity. There is the love of
knowing without the love of learning - the beclouding here leads to dissipation of mind. There is the
love of being sincere without the love of learning - the beclouding here leads to an injurious
disregard of consequences. There is the love of straightforwardness without the love of learning -
the beclouding here leads to rudeness. There is the love of boldness without the love of learning -
the beclouding here leads to insubordination. There is the love of firmness without the love of
learning - the beclouding here leads to extravagant conduct."
17-9

The Master said, "My children, why do you not study the Book of Poetry? The Odes serve to
stimulate the mind. They may be used for purposes of self-contemplation. They teach the art of
sociability. They show how to regulate feelings of resentment. From them you learn the more
immediate duty of serving one's father, and the remoter one of serving one's prince. From them we
become largely acquainted with the names of birds, beasts, and plants."
17-10

54

The Master said to Bo Yu, "Do you give yourself to the Zhou Nan and the Shao Nan. The man who
has not studied the Zhou Nan and the Shao Nan is like one who stands with his face right against a
wall. Is he not so?"
17-11
The Master said, "'It is according to the rules of propriety,' they say. 'It is according to the rules of
propriety,' they say. Are gems and silk all that is meant by propriety? 'It is music,' they say. 'It is
music,' they say. Are bells and drums all that is meant by music?"
17-12
The Master said, "He who puts on an appearance of stern firmness, while inwardly he is weak, is
like one of the small, mean people - yea, is he not like the thief who breaks through, or climbs over,
a wall?"
17-13
The Master said, "Your good, careful people of the villages are the thieves of virtue."
17-14
The Master said, "To tell, as we go along, what we have heard on the way, is to cast away our
virtue."
17-15

The Master said, "There are those mean creatures! How impossible it is along with them to serve
one's prince! While they have not got their aims, their anxiety is how to get them. When they have
got them, their anxiety is lest they should lose them. When they are anxious lest such things should
be lost, there is nothing to which they will not proceed."
17-16

The Master said, "Anciently, men had three failings, which now perhaps are not to be found. The
high-mindedness of antiquity showed itself in a disregard of small things; the high-mindedness of
the present day shows itself in wild license. The stern dignity of antiquity showed itself in grave
reserve; the stern dignity of the present day shows itself in quarrelsome perverseness. The stupidity
of antiquity showed itself in straightforwardness; the stupidity of the present day shows itself in
sheer deceit."
17-17
The Master said, "Fine words and an insinuating appearance are seldom associated with virtue."
17-18
The Master said, "I hate the manner in which purple takes away the luster of vermilion. I hate the
way in which the songs of Zheng confound the music of the Ya. I hate those who with their sharp
mouths overthrow kingdoms and families."
17-19

The Master said, "I would prefer not speaking." Zi Gong said, "If you, Master, do not speak, what
shall we, your disciples, have to record?" The Master said, "Does Heaven speak? The four seasons
pursue their courses, and all things are continually being produced, but does Heaven say anything?"
55

17-20
Ru Bei wished to see Confucius, but Confucius declined, on the ground of being sick, to see him.
When the bearer of this message went out at the door, (the Master) took his lute and sang to it, in
order that Bei might hear him.
17-21

Zai Wo asked about the three years' mourning for parents, saying that one year was long enough. "If
the superior man," said he, "abstains for three years from the observances of propriety, those
observances will be quite lost. If for three years he abstains from music, music will be ruined.
Within a year the old grain is exhausted, and the new grain has sprung up, and, in procuring fire by
friction, we go through all the changes of wood for that purpose. After a complete year, the
mourning may stop." The Master said, "If you were, after a year, to eat good rice, and wear
embroidered clothes, would you feel at ease?" "I should," replied Wo. The Master said, "If you can
feel at ease, do it. But a superior man, during the whole period of mourning, does not enjoy pleasant
food which he may eat, nor derive pleasure from music which he may hear. He also does not feel at
ease, if he is comfortably lodged. Therefore he does not do what you propose. But now you feel at
ease and may do it." Zai Wo then went out, and the Master said, "This shows Yu's want of virtue. It
is not till a child is three years old that it is allowed to leave the arms of its parents. And the three
years' mourning is universally observed throughout the empire. Did Yu enjoy the three years' love of
his parents?"
17-22
The Master said, "Hard is it to deal with who will stuff himself with food the whole day, without
applying his mind to anything good! Are there not gamesters and chess players? To be one of these
would still be better than doing nothing at all."
17-23

Zi Lu said, "Does the superior man esteem valor?" The Master said, "The superior man holds
righteousness to be of highest importance. A man in a superior situation, having valor without
righteousness, will be guilty of insubordination; one of the lower people having valor without
righteousness, will commit robbery."
17-24

Zi Gong said, "Has the superior man his hatreds also?" The Master said, "He has his hatreds. He
hates those who proclaim the evil of others. He hates the man who, being in a low station, slanders
his superiors. He hates those who have valor merely, and are unobservant of propriety. He hates
those who are forward and determined, and, at the same time, of contracted understanding." The
Master then inquired, "Ci, have you also your hatreds?" Zi Gong replied, "I hate those who pry out
matters, and ascribe the knowledge to their wisdom. I hate those who are only not modest, and think
that they are valorous. I hate those who make known secrets, and think that they are
straightforward."
56

17-25
The Master said, "Of all people, girls and servants are the most difficult to behave to. If you are
familiar with them, they lose their humility. If you maintain a reserve towards them, they are
discontented."
17-26
The Master said, "When a man at forty is the object of dislike, he will always continue what he is."

- Wei Zi 18
18-1
The Viscount of Wei withdrew from the court. The Viscount of Ji became a slave to Zhou. Bi Gan
remonstrated with him and died. Confucius said, "The Yin dynasty possessed these three men of
virtue."
18-2

Hui of Liu Xia, being chief criminal judge, was thrice dismissed from his office. Some one said to
him, "Is it not yet time for you, sir, to leave this?" He replied, "Serving men in an upright way,
where shall I go to, and not experience such a thrice-repeated dismissal? If I choose to serve men in
a crooked way, what necessity is there for me to leave the country of my parents?"
18-3

The duke Jing of Qi, with reference to the manner in which he should treat Confucius, said, "I
cannot treat him as I would the chief of the Ji family. I will treat him in a manner between that
accorded to the chief of the Ji, and that given to the chief of the Meng family." He also said, "I am
old; I cannot use his doctrines." Confucius took his departure.
18-4
The people of Qi sent to Lu a present of female musicians, which Ji Huan received, and for three
days no court was held. Confucius took his departure.
18-5

The madman of Chu, Jie Yu, passed by Confucius, singing and saying, "O Feng! O Feng! How is
your virtue degenerated! As to the past, reproof is useless; but the future may still be provided
against. Give up your vain pursuit. Give up your vain pursuit. Peril awaits those who now engage in
affairs of government." Confucius alighted and wished to converse with him, but Jie Yu hastened
away, so that he could not talk with him.
18-6

Chang Zu and Jie Ni were at work in the field together, when Confucius passed by them, and sent
Zi Lu to inquire for the ford. Chang Zu said, "Who is he that holds the reins in the carriage there?"
Zi Lu told him, "It is Kong Qiu.', "Is it not Kong Qiu of Lu?" asked he. "Yes," was the reply, to
57

which the other rejoined, "He knows the ford." Zi Lu then inquired of Jie Ni, who said to him,
"Who are you, sir?" He answered, "I am Zhong You." "Are you not the disciple of Kong Qiu of
Lu?" asked the other. "I am," replied he, and then Jie Ni said to him, "Disorder, like a swelling
flood, spreads over the whole empire, and who is he that will change its state for you? Rather than
follow one who merely withdraws from this one and that one, had you not better follow those who
have withdrawn from the world altogether?" With this he fell to covering up the seed, and
proceeded with his work, without stopping. Zi Lu went and reported their remarks, when the Master
observed with a sigh, "It is impossible to associate with birds and beasts, as if they were the same
with us. If I associate not with these people - with mankind - with whom shall I associate? If right
principles prevailed through the empire, there would be no use for me to change its state."
18-7

Zi Lu, following the Master, happened to fall behind, when he met an old man, carrying across his
shoulder on a staff a basket for weeds. Zi Lu said to him, "Have you seen my master, sir?" The old
man replied, "Your four limbs are unaccustomed to toil; you cannot distinguish the five kinds of
grain - who is your master?" With this, he planted his staff in the ground, and proceeded to weed. Zi
Lu joined his hands across his breast, and stood before him. The old man kept Zi Lu to pass the
night in his house, killed a fowl, prepared millet, and feasted him. He also introduced to him his two
sons. Next day, Zi Lu went on his way, and reported his adventure. The Master said, "He is a
recluse," and sent Zi Lu back to see him again, but when he got to the place, the old man was gone.
Zi Lu then said to the family, "Not to take office is not righteous. If the relations between old and
young may not be neglected, how is it that he sets aside the duties that should be observed between
sovereign and minister? Wishing to maintain his personal purity, he allows that great relation to
come to confusion. A superior man takes office, and performs the righteous duties belonging to it.
As to the failure of right principles to make progress, he is aware of that."
18-8

The men who have retired to privacy from the world have been Bo Yi, Shu Qi, Yu Zhong, Yi Yi,
Zhu Zhang, Hui of Liu Xia, and Shao Lian. The Master said, "Refusing to surrender their wills, or
to submit to any taint in their persons - such, I think, were Bo Yi and Shu Qi. "It may be said of Hui
of Liu Xia, and of Shao Lian, that they surrendered their wills, and submitted to taint in their
persons, but their words corresponded with reason, and their actions were such as men are anxious
to see. This is all that is to be remarked in them. "It may be said of Yu Zhong and Yi Yi, that, while
they hid themselves in their seclusion, they gave a license to their words; but in their persons, they
succeeded in preserving their purity, and, in their retirement, they acted according to the exigency of
the times. "I am different from all these. I have no course for which I am predetermined, and no
course against which I am predetermined."
18-9

The grand music master, Zhi, went to Qi. Gan, the master of the band at the second meal, went to
Chu. Liao, the band master at the third meal, went to Cai. Que, the band master at the fourth meal,
went to Qin. Fang Shu, the drum master, withdrew to the north of the river. Wu, the master of the
hand drum, withdrew to the Han. Yang, the assistant music master, and Xiang, master of the musical
58

stone, withdrew to an island in the sea.
18-10

The duke of Zhou addressed his son, the duke of Lu, saying, "The virtuous prince does not neglect
his relations. He does not cause the great ministers to repine at his not employing them. Without
some great cause, he does not dismiss from their offices the members of old families. He does not
seek in one man talents for every employment."
18-11
To Zhou belonged the eight officers, Bo Da, Bo Kuo, Zhong Tu, Zhong Hu, Shu Ye, Shu Xia, Ji Sui,
and Ji Gua.

- Zi Zhang 19
19-1
Zi Zhang said, "The scholar, trained for public duty, seeing threatening danger, is prepared to
sacrifice his life. When the opportunity of gain is presented to him, he thinks of righteousness. In
sacrificing, his thoughts are reverential. In mourning, his thoughts are about the grief which he
should feel. Such a man commands our approbation indeed."
19-2
Zi Zhang said, "When a man holds fast to virtue, but without seeking to enlarge it, and believes in
right principles, but without firm sincerity, what account can be made of his existence or non-
existence?"
19-3

The disciples of Zi Xia asked Zi Zhang about the principles that should characterize mutual
intercourse. Zi Zhang asked, "What does Zi Xia say on the subject?" They replied, "Zi Xia says:
'Associate with those who can advantage you. Put away from you those who cannot do so.'" Zi
Zhang observed, "This is different from what I have learned. The superior man honors the talented
and virtuous, and bears with all. He praises the good, and pities the incompetent. Am I possessed of
great talents and virtue? - who is there among men whom I will not bear with? Am I devoid of
talents and virtue? - men will put me away from them. What have we to do with the putting away of
others?"
19-4
Zi Xia said, "Even in inferior studies and employments there is something worth being looked at;
but if it be attempted to carry them out to what is remote, there is a danger of their proving
inapplicable. Therefore, the superior man does not practice them."
19-5
Zi Xia said, "He, who from day to day recognizes what he has not yet, and from month to month
does not forget what he has attained to, may be said indeed to love to learn."
19-6
Zi Xia said, "There are learning extensively, and having a firm and sincere aim; inquiring with
earnestness, and reflecting with self-application - virtue is in such a course."
59

19-7
Zi Xia said, "Mechanics have their shops to dwell in, in order to accomplish their works. The
superior man learns, in order to reach to the utmost of his principles."
19-8
Zi Xia said, "The mean man is sure to gloss his faults."
19-9
Zi Xia said, "The superior man undergoes three changes. Looked at from a distance, he appears
stern; when approached, he is mild; when he is heard to speak, his language is firm and decided."
19-10

Zi Xia said, "The superior man, having obtained their confidence, may then impose labors on his
people. If he have not gained their confidence, they will think that he is oppressing them. Having
obtained the confidence of his prince, one may then remonstrate with him. If he have not gained his
confidence, the prince will think that he is vilifying him."
19-11
Zi Xia said, "When a person does not transgress the boundary line in the great virtues, he may pass
and repass it in the small virtues."
19-12

Zi You said, "The disciples and followers of Zi Xia, in sprinkling and sweeping the ground, in
answering and replying, in advancing and receding, are sufficiently accomplished. But these are
only the branches of learning, and they are left ignorant of what is essential. How can they be
acknowledged as sufficiently taught?" Zi Xia heard of the remark and said, "Alas! Yan You is
wrong. According to the way of the superior man in teaching, what departments are there which he
considers of prime importance, and delivers? what are there which he considers of secondary
importance, and allows himself to be idle about? But as in the case of plants, which are assorted
according to their classes, so he deals with his disciples. How can the way of a superior man be
such as to make fools of any of them? Is it not the sage alone, who can unite in one the beginning
and the consummation of learning?"
19-13
Zi Xia said, "The officer, having discharged all his duties, should devote his leisure to learning. The
student, having completed his learning, should apply himself to be an officer."
19-14
Zi You said, "Mourning, having been carried to the utmost degree of grief, should stop with that."
19-15
Zi You said, "My friend Zhang can do things which are hard to be done, but yet he is not perfectly
virtuous."
19-16
The philosopher Zeng said, "How imposing is the manner of Zhang! It is difficult along with him to
60

practice virtue."
19-17
The philosopher Zeng said, "I heard this from our Master: 'Men may not have shown what is in
them to the full extent, and yet they will be found to do so, on the occasion of mourning for their
parents."
19-18

The philosopher Zeng said, "I have heard this from our Master: 'The filial piety of Meng Zhuang, in
other matters, was what other men are competent to, but, as seen in his not changing the ministers
of his father, nor his father's mode of government, it is difficult to be attained to.'"
19-19

The chief of the Meng family having appointed Yang Fu to be chief criminal judge, the latter
consulted the philosopher Zeng. Zeng said, "The rulers have failed in their duties, and the people
consequently have been disorganized, for a long time. When you have found out the truth of any
accusation, be grieved for and pity them, and do not feel joy at your own ability."
19-20
Zi Gong said, "Zhou's wickedness was not so great as that name implies. Therefore, the superior
man hates to dwell in a low-lying situation, where all the evil of the world will flow in upon him."
19-21
Zi Gong said, "The faults of the superior man are like the eclipses of the sun and moon. He has his
faults, and all men see them; he changes again, and all men look up to him."
19-22

Gong Sun Zhao of Wei asked Zi Gong, saying. "From whom did Zhong Ni get his learning?" Zi
Gong replied, "The doctrines of Wen and Wu have not yet fallen to the ground. They are to be found
among men. Men of talents and virtue remember the greater principles of them, and others, not
possessing such talents and virtue, remember the smaller. Thus, all possess the doctrines of Wen and
Wu. Where could our Master go that he should not have an opportunity of learning them? And yet
what necessity was there for his having a regular master?"
19-23

Shu Sun Wu Shu observed to the great officers in the court, saying, "Zi Gong is superior to Zhong
Ni." Zi Fu Jing Bo reported the observation to Zi Gong, who said, "Let me use the comparison of a
house and its encompassing wall. My wall only reaches to the shoulders. One may peep over it, and
see whatever is valuable in the apartments. The wall of my Master is several fathoms high. If one do
not find the door and enter by it, he cannot see the ancestral temple with its beauties, nor all the
officers in their rich array. But I may assume that they are few who find the door. Was not the
observation of the chief only what might have been expected?"
19-24

61

Shu Sun Wu Shu having spoken revilingly of Zhong Ni, Zi Gong said, "It is of no use doing so.
Zhong Ni cannot be reviled. The talents and virtue of other men are hillocks and mounds which
may be stepped over. Zhong Ni is the sun or moon, which it is not possible to step over. Although a
man may wish to cut himself off from the sage, what harm can he do to the sun or moon? He only
shows that he does not know his own capacity.
19-25

Chen Zi Qin, addressing Zi Gong, said, "You are too modest. How can Zhong Ni be said to be
superior to you?" Zi Gong said to him, "For one word a man is often deemed to be wise, and for one
word he is often deemed to be foolish. We ought to be careful indeed in what we say. Our Master
cannot be attained to, just in the same way as the heavens cannot be gone up by the steps of a stair.
Were our Master in the position of the ruler of a state or the chief of a family, we should find
verified the description which has been given of a sage's rule: he would plant the people, and
forthwith they would be established; he would lead them on, and forthwith they would follow him;
he would make them happy, and forthwith multitudes would resort to his dominions; he would
stimulate them, and forthwith they would be harmonious. While he lived, he would be glorious.
When he died, he would be bitterly lamented. How is it possible for him to be attained to?"

- Yao Yue 20
20-1

Yao said, "Oh! you, Shun, the Heaven-determined order of succession now rests in your person.
Sincerely hold fast the due Mean. If there shall be distress and want within the four seas, the
Heavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end." Shun also used the same language in giving charge
to You. Tang said, "I, the child Lu, presume to use a dark-colored victim, and presume to announce
to Thee, O most great and sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers, O
God, I do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is by thy mind, O God. If, in my person, I
commit offenses, they are not to be attributed to you, the people of the myriad regions. If you in the
myriad regions commit offenses, these offenses must rest on my person." Zhou conferred great
gifts, and the good were enriched. "Although he has his near relatives, they are not equal to my
virtuous men. The people are throwing blame upon me, the One man." He carefully attended to the
weights and measures, examined the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and the good
government of the kingdom took its course. He revived states that had been extinguished, restored
families whose line of succession had been broken, and called to office those who had retired into
obscurity, so that throughout the kingdom the hearts of the people turned towards him. What he
attached chief importance to were the food of the people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices. By
his generosity, he won all. By his sincerity, he made the people repose trust in him. By his earnest
activity, his achievements were great. By his justice, all were delighted.
20-2

62

Zi Zhang asked Confucius, saying, "In what way should a person in authority act in order that he
may conduct government properly?" The Master replied, "Let him honor the five excellent, and
banish away the four bad, things; then may he conduct government properly." Zi Zhang said, "What
are meant by the five excellent things?" The Master said, "When the person in authority is
beneficent without great expenditure; when he lays tasks on the people without their repining; when
he pursues what he desires without being covetous; when he maintains a dignified ease without
being proud; when he is majestic without being fierce." Zi Zhang said, "What is meant by being
beneficent without great expenditure?" The Master replied, "When the person in authority makes
more beneficial to the people the things from which they naturally derive benefit;-- is not this being
beneficent without great expenditure? When he chooses the labors which are proper, and makes
them labor on them, who will repine? When his desires are set on benevolent government, and he
secures it, who will accuse him of covetousness? Whether he has to do with many people or few, or
with things great or small, he does not dare to indicate any disrespect - is not this to maintain a
dignified ease without any pride? He adjusts his clothes and cap, and throws a dignity into his
looks, so that, thus dignified, he is looked at with awe - is not this to be majestic without being
fierce?" Zi Zhang then asked, "What are meant by the four bad things?" The Master said, "To put
the people to death without having instructed them - this is called cruelty. To require from them,
suddenly, the full tale of work, without having given them warning - this is called oppression. To
issue orders as if without urgency, at first, and, when the time comes, to insist on them with severity
- this is called injury. And, generally, in the giving pay or rewards to men, to do it in a stingy way -
this is called acting the part of a mere official."
20-3
The Master said, "Without recognizing the ordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to be a superior
man. Without an acquaintance with the rules of Propriety, it is impossible for the character to be
established. Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible to know men."
63