“The Classic of Filiality” (Xiaojing, also translated as “Classic of Filial Piety”) was written during the Former or Western
Han dynasty (206 BCE-8 CE). Although it is not a classic in the sense of being a document dating from the Zhou
period, “The Classic of Filiality” has been a popular and highly respected text throughout East Asia up through the
twentieth century. The text is cast in the form of a conversation between Confucius and Zengzi, one of his students.
In the text, “Confucius” explains the concept of filiality, or filial piety, and its central importance in family, community,
and spiritual and political life.



Document Excerpts with Questions (Longer selection follows this section)
From Sources of Chinese Tradition, compiled by Wm. Theodore de Bary and Irene Bloom, 2nd ed., vol. 1 (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1999), 326-329. © 1999 Columbia University Press. Reproduced with the permission of the publisher. All rights
reserved.


Selections from The Classic of Filiality (Xiaojing)

Our body, skin, and hair are all received from our parents; we dare not injure them. This is the
first priority in filial duty. To establish oneself in the world and practice the Way; to uphold
one’s good name for posterity and give glory to one’s father and mother ‑‑ this is the completion
of filial duty. Thus filiality begins with service to parents, continues in service to the ruler, and
ends with establishing oneself in the world [and becoming an exemplary person].

…

Loving one’s parents, one dare not hate others. Revering one’s parents, one dare not be
contemptuous of others. When his love and reverence are perfected in service to parents, [the
ruler’s] moral influence is shed on all the people and his good example shines in all directions.

…

As one serves one’s father, one serves one’s mother, drawing on the same love. As one serves
one’s father, one serves one’s prince, drawing on the same reverence. The mother draws upon
one’s love, the prince on one’s reverence. Therefore, if one serves one’s prince with the filiality
one shows to one’s father, it becomes the virtue of fidelity (loyalty). If one serves one’s superiors
with brotherly submission it becomes the virtue of obedience. Never failing in fidelity and


obedience, this is how one serves superiors. Thus one may preserve one’s rank and office and
continue one’s family sacrifices. This is the filiality of the scholar‑official.




1. What concrete ways is filial piety to be carried out in the practice of everyday
life, both in the long term (thinking about one’s entire life) and in the short
term (thinking about daily practices)?
2. Are there similarities between the principle of filiality as described here and
the expected roles of children in the family in other cultures in other places
and times?
3. The text draws parallels between filiality as practiced in the family and the
proper relationships between rulers and officials. Would the principles
described here work in a democracy? Why or why not?
4. Given the principles of filiality as described here, is there any room for a child
to correct the immoral behavior of his or her father, or for an official to offer
corrective advice or even admonition in response to the immoral or counter-
productive behavior or decisions of his ruler?




Longer Selection
From Sources of Chinese Tradition, compiled by Wm. Theodore de Bary and Irene Bloom, 2nd ed., vol. 1 (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1999), 326-329. © 1999 Columbia University Press. Reproduced with the permission of the publisher. All rights
reserved.


Selections from The Classic of Filiality (Xiaojing)

1. Introduction to Basic Principles
Confucius was at leisure, with Zengzi in attendance. He asked Zengzi, “Do you know by what
surpassing virtue and essential way the early kings kept the world in order, the people in
harmony both with their relatives and at large, and all, both high and low, uncomplaining?”
Zengzi, rising from his seat, said, “Unenlightened as I am, how could I know that?” Confucius
said, “Filiality is the root of virtue and the wellspring of instruction. Take your seat and I shall
explain.

“Our body, skin, and hair are all received from our parents; we dare not injure them. This is the
first priority in filial duty. To establish oneself in the world and practice the Way; to uphold
one’s good name for posterity and give glory to one’s father and mother ‑‑ this is the completion
of filial duty. Thus filiality begins with service to parents, continues in service to the ruler, and
ends with establishing oneself in the world [and becoming an exemplary person].



“As it is said in the Daya [of the Classic of Odes]: ‘Forget not your forebears; cultivate the virtue
received from them.’ “1

2. The Son of Heaven
The Master said, “Loving one’s parents, one dare not hate others. Revering one’s parents, one
dare not be contemptuous of others. When his love and reverence are perfected in service to
parents, [the ruler’s] moral influence is shed on all the people and his good example shines in
all directions. …”

…

5. Scholar‑Officials (Shi)
As one serves one’s father, one serves one’s mother, drawing on the same love. As one serves
one’s father, one serves one’s prince, drawing on the same reverence. The mother draws upon
one’s love, the prince on one’s reverence. Therefore, if one serves one’s prince with the filiality
one shows to one’s father, it becomes the virtue of fidelity (loyalty). If one serves one’s superiors
with brotherly submission it becomes the virtue of obedience. Never failing in fidelity and
obedience, this is how one serves superiors. Thus one may preserve one’s rank and office and
continue one’s family sacrifices. This is the filiality of the scholar‑official. …

6. Commoners
In keeping with Heaven’s seasons and Earth’s resources, by one’s industry and frugality one
supports one’s father and mother. This is the filiality of the common people.

From the Son of Heaven down to the common people, if filiality is not followed from beginning
to end, disaster is sure to follow.

1 Ode 235.