Chapter One

Chapter 2
The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
At that time, the bodhisattvas and all those world leaders had these
thoughts:
What are the buddhas’ grounds? What are the buddhas’ spheres of
action? What are the buddhas’ empowerments? What are the bud­
dhas’ actions? What are the buddhas’ powers? What are the bud­
dhas’ fearlessnesses? What are the buddhas’ samādhis? What are the
buddhas’ spiritual superknowledges? What are the buddhas’ sover­
eign masteries? And what are the ways in which the buddhas are
impossible to overcome?
What are the eyes of the buddhas like? What are the ears of the
buddhas like? What is the nose of the buddhas like? What is the
tongue of the buddhas like? What is the body of the buddhas like?
What is the mind of the buddhas like? What is the halo of the bud­
dhas’ body like? What is the light of the buddhas like? What is the
voice of the buddhas like? What is the wisdom of the buddhas like?
We only wish that the Bhagavat will take pity on us by revealing
and explaining these matters.
Furthermore, for the sake of all bodhisattvas, all buddhas
throughout the oceans of worlds of the ten directions explain the
ocean of worlds, the ocean of beings, the ocean of what is estab­
lished in the Dharma realm,58 the ocean of buddhas, the Buddha’s
ocean of pāramitās, the Buddha’s ocean of liberations, the Buddha’s
ocean of transformations, the ocean of teachings expounded by
the Buddha, the ocean of names of the Buddha, and the ocean of
the Buddha’s life spans, as well as the ocean of all bodhisattvas’
vows, the ocean of all bodhisattvas’ setting forth [on the path],59
the ocean of all bodhisattvas’ provisions for the path, the ocean of
all bodhisattvas’ vehicles, the ocean of all bodhisattvas’ practices,
the ocean of all bodhisattvas’ emancipations, the ocean of all bod­
hisattvas’ spiritual superknowledges, the ocean of all bodhisattvas’
pāramitās, the ocean of all bodhisattvas’ grounds, and the ocean of
all bodhisattvas’ knowledge.
We only wish that, in the same way, the Buddha, the Bhagavat,
will also explain these matters for us.

120

The Flower Adornment Sutra
At that time, through the awesome spiritual power of the bodhisat­
tvas, a voice spontaneously emanated from amidst the clouds of all
kinds of offerings which then spoke these verses:
During countless kalpas, he cultivated the practices to fulfillment
and then realized right enlightenment beneath the bodhi tree.
In order to liberate beings, he manifested bodies everywhere
which, like clouds, completely fill all places to the end of future time.
Where beings have doubts, he severs them all,
thus enabling them all to develop vast resolute faith.
He causes their boundless sufferings to all be done away with
and enables them all to realize the happiness of all buddhas.
Countless bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in a kṣetra
have all come to this assembly and together gaze up in admiration.
Please, in accordance with what is fitting for their minds to receive,
expound the sublime Dharma to eliminate their doubts and delusions.
How should we comprehend the grounds of the buddhas?
How should we contemplate the tathāgatas’ spheres of action?
The empowerments provided by the Buddha are boundless.
Please explain these dharmas to enable purification.
What are the bases of the buddhas’ practices
which, by resort to wisdom, one is able to understand and enter?
The buddhas’ powers are pure and boundlessly vast.
For the sake of the bodhisattvas, please reveal this for them.
What are their vast samādhis?
How did they purify the dharma of the fearlessnesses?
The uses of the powers of spiritual superknowledges are measureless.
Please explain these in accordance with beings’ mental dispositions.
The buddhas, the kings of the Dharma, like the leaders of the world,
in all they do, have a sovereign independence that no one can restrain.
This as well as all their other vast dharmas
should be revealed and explained for the benefit of all.
How is it that the eyes of the buddhas are measureless?
And how is this also true of their ears, nose, tongue, and body?
And how are their minds also measureless?
Please show us so that we may know the means by which this is so.
Such matters as the ocean of kṣetras, the ocean of beings,
and the ocean of all that is established throughout the Dharma realm,
as well as the ocean of all buddhas which is also boundless—
Please, freely explain all these matters for the sons of the Buddha.
The ocean of the many perfections, forever beyond conceivability,
pervasive entry into the ocean of expedients leading to the liberations,

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
121
and the ocean of all of the gateways into the Dharma—
Those in this site of enlightenment wish you would expound on these.
At that time, knowing the thoughts in the minds of the bodhisattvas,
the Bhagavat emanated from between his teeth a number of light rays
as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, namely: pervasively
illuminating light rays of many kinds of bejeweled flowers; light rays
emitting many different sounds to adorn the Dharma realm; light
rays trailing subtle clouds; light rays revealing the buddhas of the ten
directions sitting in their sites of enlightenment, manifesting trans­
formations with their spiritual powers; light rays producing canopies
of clouds of the flaming light of all jewels; light rays unimpeded in
completely filling the Dharma realm; light rays pervasively adorning
all buddha kṣetras; light rays creating distant banners of pure vajra
jewels; light rays everywhere adorning sites of enlightenment with
their bodhisattva congregations; and light rays emanating marvelous
voices proclaiming the names of all buddhas.
There were light rays such as these as numerous as the atoms in
a buddha kṣetra. Each of these in turn had a retinue of light rays as
numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. These light rays which
were all the colors of many kinds of marvelous jewels everywhere
illuminated in each of the ten directions oceans of worlds as numer­
ous as the atoms in a koṭī of buddha kṣetras.
Those residing in each of the bodhisattva congregations in those
oceans of worlds were each able to see within these light rays this
ocean of Flower Treasury Adornment Worlds. With the aid of the
Buddha’s spiritual powers, these rays of light appeared before all
those bodhisattva congregations and spoke these verses:
During countless kalpas, he cultivated an ocean of practices,
made offerings to an ocean of buddhas throughout the ten directions,
and taught and liberated an ocean of all beings. Thus he now becomes
the universally illuminating Bhagavat of the sublime enlightenment.
From each pore, he emanates transformationally conjured clouds,
the light from which everywhere illuminates the ten directions.
Those who should receive teaching are all thus awakened
and enabled to progress toward bodhi with unhindered purity.
In the past, the Buddha came and went in all the destinies of rebirth,
teaching and ripening all the many types of beings.
With boundless and measureless freely invoked spiritual powers,
in but a single mind-moment, he enables them all to attain liberation.
The bodhi tree graced with marvelous maṇi jewels
has many different adornments, all of which are extraordinary.

122

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Beneath it, the Buddha, having realized the right enlightenment,
emanates great radiance which is everywhere awesomely dazzling.
The earth-shaking roar of his great voice pervades the ten directions,
everywhere widely proclaiming the dharma of quiescence.
Adapting to the mental dispositions of all beings,
he adopts many different skillful means to enable their awakening.
In the past, he cultivated to complete fulfillment
perfections as numerous as the atoms in a thousand kṣetras.
He has already perfected all the powers.
You should all go and join in looking up to and revering him.
Buddha’s sons of the ten directions as many as the atoms in a kṣetra
all join in rejoicing and then coming to gather there.
Having already rained down clouds of offerings,
now, before the Buddha, they single-mindedly gaze up in respect.
With the Tathāgata’s single voice which is measureless,60
he is able to expound on the deep and vast ocean of scriptures,
and everywhere rain sublime Dharma in response to beings’ minds.
It is only fitting to go see that most revered one of two-legged beings.61
All vows of the buddhas of the three periods of time
are all proclaimed there beneath the bodhi tree.
In but a single kṣaṇa, they are all manifested there.
Thus you ought to swiftly go and pay your respects to the Tathāgata.
Vairocana, that great ocean of wisdom,
emanates light from his mouth that no one does not see.
He now waits for the assembly to gather before he begins to expound.
You should go there to see him and hear what he teaches.
At that time, having been awakened by the Buddha’s rays of light,
each of the congregations in the oceans of worlds throughout the ten
directions joined in coming to pay respects to Vairocana Tathāgata so
that they could draw near to him and make offerings. They included
the following:
East of this ocean of Flower Treasury Adornment worlds, the next
ocean of worlds is named Pure Light Lotus Blossom Adornment.
Within that world system, there is a land named Vajra Treasury of Maṇi
Necklaces in which there was a buddha named King Whose Dharma
Waters Awaken All in Boundless Space. Within that tathāgata’s great
oceanic congregation there was a bodhisattva-mahāsattva named
Lotus Banner Contemplating the Supreme Dharma who came to pay
his respects to the Buddha with a group of bodhisattvas as numer­
ous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Each of them manifested ten

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
123
kinds of clouds of the physical marks of bodhisattvas which filled all
of empty space and did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of light clouds which rained down
lotus flowers made of all kinds of jewels, also manifested ten kinds
of clouds of jeweled peaks of Sumeru, also manifested ten kinds
of sunlight clouds, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of jeweled
flower garlands, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of all types of
music, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of powdered incense trees,
also manifested ten kind of clouds of perfume and incense which
appeared with many different forms and features, and also mani­
fested ten kinds of clouds of all kinds of incense trees.
Clouds of offerings such as these as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not dis­
perse. After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they
faced the Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then pre­
sented these to him as offerings. Then, off to the east, they each trans­
formationally created a lion throne with a dais radiant with the light
of various flowers and then sat on it in the lotus posture.
South of this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean
of worlds is named Magnificent Treasury of the Moonlight of All
Jewels. Within that world system, there is a land named Perfectly Full
Adornment with Boundless Light in which there was a buddha named
Sumeru King of the Light of Universal Wisdom and Qualities. Within
that tathāgata’s great oceanic congregation there was a bodhisattva-
mahāsattva named Wisdom Everywhere Illuminating the Ocean of
Dharmas who came to pay his respects to the Buddha with a group
of bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Each
of them manifested ten kinds of clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels con­
taining treasuries of every kind of adorning light which filled all of
empty space and did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels
raining down every kind of jeweled adornment emanating pervasive
dazzling illumination, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of sover­
eign maṇi jewels emanating bejeweled flaming light widely proclaim­
ing and praising the Buddha’s names, also manifested ten kinds of
clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels speaking all dharmas of the Buddha,
also manifested ten kinds of clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels con­
taining sites of enlightenment adorned with many marvelous trees,
also manifested ten kinds clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels contain­
ing jeweled light everywhere illuminating and revealing the many

124

The Flower Adornment Sutra
emanation buddhas, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of sovereign
maṇi jewels everywhere showing the adorned images in all sites of
enlightenment, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of sovereign maṇi
jewels containing lamps emanating subtly flaming radiance which
spoke about the realm of all buddhas, also manifested ten kinds of
clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels containing images of the palaces
in an inconceivable number of buddha kṣetras, and also manifested
ten kinds of clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels everywhere revealing
images of the buddhas of the three periods of time.
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels such as these as numerous as
the atoms in an ocean of worlds completely pervaded empty space
and did not disperse. After those bodhisattvas had manifested these
clouds, they faced the Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and
then presented these to him as offerings. Then, off to the south, they
each transformationally created a lion throne with a dais of indranīla
jewels, jambūnada gold, and lotus flowers and then sat on it in the
lotus posture.
West of this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean of
worlds is named Light of Delightful Jewels. Within that world sys­
tem, there is a land named Producing Supremely Marvelous Physical
Sustenance in which there was a buddha named Adorned with
the Jewel of Fragrant and Radiant Qualities. Within that tathāgata’s
great oceanic congregation, there was a bodhisattva-mahāsattva
named Pervasive Adornment with Moonlight and Fragrant Flaming
Radiance who came to pay his respects to the Buddha with a group
of bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Each
of them manifested ten kinds of clouds of mansions with every type
of precious incense and many wonderful flowers which filled all of
empty space and did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of clouds of mansions with many
kinds of sovereign jewels having boundlessly many colors and appear­
ances, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of mansions with jeweled
lamps producing fragrant flaming light, also manifested ten kinds of
clouds of mansions with every type of real pearl, also manifested ten
kinds of clouds of mansions with every type of jeweled flower, also
manifested ten kinds of clouds of mansions adorned with jewel gar­
lands, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of mansions everywhere
revealing all the treasuries of adorning light throughout the ten direc­
tions, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of mansions adorned with
inlays made of the many kinds of jewels, also manifested ten kinds of

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
125
clouds of mansions with every kind of adornment pervading the ten
directions, and also manifested ten kinds of clouds of mansions with
floral gateways and nets of bells.
Mansion clouds such as these as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not dis­
perse. After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they
faced the Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then pre­
sented these to him as offerings. Then, off to the west, they each
transformationally created a lion throne with petals of real gold and
a dais of immense jewels and then sat on it in the lotus posture.
North of this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean
of worlds is named Perfectly Full Treasury of Vaiḍūrya Lotus Light.
Within that world system, there is a land named Utpala Blossom
Adornment in which there was a buddha named King of the Sound
of the Banner of Universal Knowledge. Within that tathāgata’s great
oceanic congregation there was a bodhisattva-mahāsattva named
Lion Sprint Radiance who came to pay his respects to the Buddha
with a group of bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds. Each of them manifested ten kinds of clouds of marvelous
trees with all kinds of fragrant maṇi jewels which filled all of empty
space and did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of clouds of trees adorned with
dense foliage and marvelous fragrance, also manifested ten kinds of
clouds of adorned trees which transformationally produce trees of all
the boundlessly many different colors and appearances, also mani­
fested ten kinds of clouds of trees adorned with encircling rings of all
kinds of flowers, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of trees adorned
with spheres of light from the flaming radiance of all kinds of pre­
cious jewels, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of trees adorned with
all kinds of sandalwood-scented images of bodhisattvas’ form bod­
ies, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of trees showing the incon­
ceivable adornments of sites of enlightenment from the distant past,
also manifested ten kinds of clouds of trees with a treasury of robes
adorned with many jewels which were as radiant as the shining sun,
and also manifested ten kinds of clouds of trees which everywhere
emanated all kinds of pleasing sounds.
Clouds of trees such as these as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not disperse.
After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they faced the
Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then presented these

126

The Flower Adornment Sutra
to him as offerings. Then, off to the north, they each transformation­
ally created a maṇi jewel lamp lotus dais lion throne and then sat on
it in the lotus posture.
Northeast of this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean
of worlds is named Colored Banner of Jambūnada Gold and Crystal.
Within that world system, there is a land named Adorned with Many
Jewels in which there was a buddha named Lamp of Fearlessness in
All Dharmas. Within that tathāgata’s great oceanic congregation there
was a bodhisattva-mahāsattva named Supremely Radiant Lamp
and Treasury of Endless Meritorious Qualities who came to pay his
respects to the Buddha with a group of bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Each of them manifested ten kinds
of clouds of jeweled lotus flower dais lion thrones in countless colors
and appearances which completely pervaded empty space and did
not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of clouds of lion thrones with
daises shining with the light of sovereign maṇi jewels, also mani­
fested ten kinds of clouds of lion thrones with all kinds of adorn­
ments and various ornaments, also manifested ten kinds of lion
throne clouds with daises adorned with jeweled chaplet lamps ema­
nating flaming radiance, also manifested ten kinds of lion throne
clouds everywhere raining down jewel necklaces, also manifested
ten kinds of lion throne clouds with daises adorned with all kinds
of fragrant flowers and jewel necklaces, also manifested ten kinds
of lion throne clouds with sovereign maṇi jewel daises showing the
adornments of the throne seats of all buddhas, also manifested ten
kinds of clouds of lion thrones with doors, windows, steps, all kinds
of strands of jewels, and all kinds of other adornments, also mani­
fested ten kinds of clouds of lion thrones with daises adorned with
the jeweled branches and trunks of all kinds of maṇi jewel trees, and
also manifested ten kinds of clouds of lion thrones with daises hav­
ing interspersed adornments of jewels and incense emanating solar
radiance.
Lion throne clouds such as these as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not dis­
perse. After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they
faced the Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then pre­
sented these to him as offerings. Then, off to the northeast, they each
transformationally created a lion throne adorned with a banner radi­
ant with the light of jeweled lotuses and maṇi jewels and then sat on
it in the lotus posture.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
127
Southeast of this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean
of worlds is named Universal Illumination of Gold Adornments and
the light of Vaiḍūrya. Within that world system, there is a land named
Pure Fragrance and Radiance in which there was a buddha named
King of Universal Joy and Deep Faith. Within that tathāgata’s great
oceanic congregation there was a bodhisattva-mahāsattva named
Universally Radiant Lamp of Wisdom who came to pay his respects
to the Buddha with a group of bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms
in an ocean of worlds. Each of them manifested ten kinds of clouds
of drapes adorned with every kind of sovereign maṇi wishing jewel
which pervaded empty space and did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of clouds of drapes adorned
with sapphires and all kinds of flowers, also manifested ten kinds
of clouds of drapes adorned with all kinds of fragrant maṇi jewels,
also manifested ten kinds of clouds of drapes adorned with flaming
jewel radiance lamps, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of drapes
adorned with sovereign maṇi jewels showing the Buddha’s use of
spiritual superknowledges to teach the Dharma, also manifested ten
kinds of clouds of maṇi jewel drapes showing form bodies adorned
with all kinds of robes, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of drapes
adorned with all kinds of jeweled flower bouquets, also manifested
ten kinds of clouds of drapes adorned with jeweled nets emanating
the sounds of chimes and bells, also manifested ten kinds of clouds
of drapes with maṇi jewel pedestals and lotus flower nets, and also
manifested ten kinds of clouds of drapes showing all kinds of incon­
ceivable adornments and images.
Clouds of drapes such as these as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not dis­
perse. After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they
faced the Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then pre­
sented these to him as offerings. Then, off to the southeast, they each
transformationally created a jeweled lotus dais lion throne and then
sat on it in the lotus posture.
Southwest of this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next
ocean of worlds is named Pervasively Shining Sunlight. Within that
world system, there is a land named Lion Sunlight in which there
was a buddha named Light and Sound of Universal Knowledge.
Within that tathāgata’s great oceanic congregation there was a
bodhisattva-mahāsattva named Topknot of Pervasive Floral Flaming
Radiance who came to pay his respects to the Buddha with a group

128

The Flower Adornment Sutra
of bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Each
of them manifested ten kinds of jeweled canopy clouds with many
kinds of marvelous adornments which pervaded empty space and
did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of floral canopy clouds adorned
with light, also manifested ten kinds of canopy clouds with treasur­
ies of infinitely colored real pearls, also manifested ten kinds of sov­
ereign maṇi jewel canopy clouds which emanated the compassionate
voices of all bodhisattvas, also manifested ten kinds of canopy clouds
with radiant chaplets made of many marvelous jewels, also mani­
fested ten kinds of canopy clouds with hanging bell nets adorned
with marvelous jewels, also manifested ten kinds of canopy clouds
adorned with maṇi jewel tree branches, also manifested ten kinds of
canopy clouds adorned with sovereign maṇi jewels emanating per­
vasively illuminating sunlight, also manifested ten kinds of canopy
clouds with every kind of perfume and burning incense, also mani­
fested ten kinds of canopy clouds of stores of sandalwood incense,
and also manifested ten kinds of canopy clouds adorned with the
pervasive radiance of the Buddha’s vast sphere of action.
Canopy clouds such as these as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not disperse.
After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they faced the
Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then presented these
to him as offerings. Then, off to the southwest, they each transfor­
mationally created a lion throne with a dais adorned with flaming-
radiance sapphires and then sat on it in the lotus posture.
Northwest of this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean
of worlds is named Dazzling Jewel Radiance. Within that world sys­
tem, there is a land named Adorned with Many Scents in which there
was a buddha named Light of the Ocean of Measureless Meritorious
Qualities. Within that tathāgata’s great oceanic congregation there was
a bodhisattva-mahāsattva named Endless Light of Sovereign Maṇi
Jewels who came to pay his respects to the Buddha with a group of
bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Each
of them manifested ten kinds of clouds of light spheres of all kinds of
jewels which completely pervaded empty space and did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of clouds of light spheres of the
flaming radiance of all kinds of jewels, also manifested ten kinds
of clouds of light spheres of every kind of marvelous flower, also
manifested ten kinds of clouds of light spheres of all transformation

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
129
buddhas, also manifested ten kinds clouds of light spheres of the
buddha lands of the ten directions, also manifested ten kinds of
clouds of light spheres of the thunderous voice and jeweled trees of
the realms of the buddhas, also manifested ten kinds of clouds of
light spheres of all kinds of vaiḍūrya jewels and sovereign maṇi jewels,
also manifested ten kinds of clouds of light spheres revealing in but
a moment the boundlessly many appearances of beings, also mani­
fested ten kinds of clouds of light spheres uttering the sounds of the
great vows of all tathāgatas, and also manifested ten kinds of clouds
of light spheres of sovereign maṇi jewels uttering the sounds of the
teaching of all beings.
Clouds of light spheres such as these as numerous as the atoms
in an ocean of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not
disperse. After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they
faced the Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then pre­
sented these to him as offerings. Then, off to the northwest, they each
transformationally created a lion throne with an endlessly radiant
and awesome dais and then sat on it in the lotus posture.
Below this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean of
worlds is named Treasury of Marvelous Virtue Fragrant with the Scent
of Lotuses. Within that world system, there is a land named Dazzling
Illumination of the Precious Lion’s Light in which there was a bud­
dha named Light of the Dharma Realm. Within that tathāgata’s great
oceanic congregation there was a bodhisattva-mahāsattva named
Radiant Dharma Realm Wisdom who came to pay his respects to the
Buddha with a group of bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds. Each of them manifested ten kinds of light clouds
with treasuries of all kinds of maṇi jewels which completely pervaded
empty space and did not disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of light clouds with every kind of
incense, also manifested ten kinds of light clouds with the flaming
light of all jewels, also manifested ten kinds of light clouds emanat­
ing the sounds of all buddhas teaching the Dharma, also manifested
ten kinds of light clouds showing the adornments in all buddha
lands, also manifested ten kinds of light clouds with every kind of
marvelous floral mansion, also manifested ten kinds of light clouds
revealing the events in every kalpa in which buddhas teach beings,
also manifested ten kinds of light clouds showing the stamens of all
the endlessly many jeweled flowers, and also manifested ten kinds of
light clouds showing thrones with all kinds of adornments.

130

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Light clouds such as these as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not disperse.
After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they faced the
Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then presented these
to him as offerings. Then, off toward the nadir, they each transforma­
tionally created a flaming jewel lamp lotus dais lion throne and then
sat on it in the lotus posture.
Above this Ocean of Flower Treasury Worlds, the next ocean
of worlds is named Adorned with the Dazzling Radiance of Maṇi
Jewels. Within that world system, there is a land named Sublime
Light of Signlessness in which there was a buddha named King of the
Unimpeded Radiance of Meritorious Qualities. Within that tathāgata’s
great oceanic congregation there was a bodhisattva-mahāsattva
named Irresistibly Powerful Vigor and Wisdom who came to pay his
respects to the Buddha with a group of bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Each of them manifested ten kinds
of flaming light clouds of jewels with infinite colors and appearances.
All of these flaming light clouds pervaded empty space and did not
disperse.
They also manifested ten kinds of flaming light clouds of maṇi
jewel nets, also manifested ten kinds of flaming light clouds of the
adornments of all vast buddha lands, also manifested ten kinds of
flaming light clouds of every kind of marvelous incense, also mani­
fested ten kinds of flaming light clouds of every kind of adornment,
also manifested ten kinds of flaming light clouds of all buddhas’
transformations, also manifested ten kinds of flaming light clouds
of the many kinds of marvelous tree blossoms, also manifested ten
kinds of flaming light clouds of every kind of vajra, also manifested
ten kinds of flaming light clouds of maṇi jewels speaking about all
the boundlessly many bodhisattva practices, and also manifested ten
kinds of flaming light clouds of lamps made from all kinds of real
pearls.
Such flaming light clouds as these as numerous as the atoms in
an ocean of worlds completely pervaded empty space and did not
disperse. After those bodhisattvas had manifested these clouds, they
faced the Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then pre­
sented these to him as offerings. Then, off toward the zenith, they
each transformationally created a radiant lotus dais lion throne
speaking with the voice of the Buddha and then sat on it in the lotus
posture.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
131
In oceans of worlds such as these as numerous as the atoms
contained in ten koṭīs of buddha kṣetras, there were bodhisattva-
mahāsattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten koṭīs of buddha kṣetras.
As they came and assembled there, each of them was surrounded
by a congregation of bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds. Each of these bodhisattvas manifested clouds of
offerings containing adornments as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds which completely pervaded empty space and did
not disperse. After they had manifested these clouds, they faced the
Buddha, bowed down in reverence to him, and then presented these
to him as offerings. Then, off in the directions from which they came,
they each transformationally created a lion throne adorned with vari­
ous jewels and then sat on it in the lotus posture.
Having thus taken their seats, those bodhisattvas each manifested
within each of their pores light rays as numerous as the atoms in ten
oceans of worlds which were the color of all the many different kinds
of precious jewels. Within each of these light rays, they all manifested
bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten oceans of worlds, all of
whom were seated on lotus dais lion thrones. All these bodhisattvas
were able to pervasively enter all the atoms of the ocean of everything
established within the entire Dharma realm. In each of those atoms,
there were vast kṣetras as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha lands.
In each of those kṣetras, there were all the buddhas, the bhagavats, of
the three periods of time. All of these bodhisattvas were able to travel
everywhere to draw near to them and present offerings to them.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of revealing
teachings through the mastery of dreams,62 they awakened beings as
numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of showing
the bases for the deaths and rebirths of the devas, they awakened
beings as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of teaching
all the bodhisattva practices, they awakened beings as numerous as
the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of every­
where causing the quaking of all kṣetras as they praise the Buddha’s
meritorious qualities and spiritual transformations, they awakened
beings as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of purify­
ing the lands of all buddhas and revealing the ocean of all their great

132

The Flower Adornment Sutra
vows, they awakened beings as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of every­
where integrating the language of beings with the spoken teachings
of the Buddha, they awakened beings as numerous as the atoms in
an ocean of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of being
able to send down the rain from the cloud of all Buddha dharmas,
they awakened beings as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of
worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of emanat­
ing light which everywhere illuminates the lands of the ten direc­
tions throughout the Dharma realm and reveals spiritual transforma­
tions, they awakened beings as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of every­
where showing bodies of the Buddha filling the entire Dharma realm
to demonstrate all tathāgatas’ powers of liberation, they awakened
beings as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
In every mind-moment, by using the Dharma gateway of
Samantabhadra Bodhisattva’s establishment of an ocean of all the
sites of enlightenment surrounded by congregations, they awakened
beings as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
In this way, throughout the entire Dharma realm, they adapted to
the minds of beings and enabled them all to awaken.
In every mind-moment and in every land: They each caused
beings as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru who have fallen
into wretched destinies to forever escape their suffering; they each
enabled beings as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru who were
dwelling among those certain to follow the wrong path to join those
who are certain to follow the right path;63 they each caused beings as
numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru to achieve rebirth in celes­
tial abodes in accordance with their wishes; they each caused beings
as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru to become established on
the grounds of śrāvaka disciples and pratyekabuddhas; they each caused
beings as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru to serve good
spiritual guides and perfect the many practices which produce merit;
they each caused beings as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru
to resolve to attain unexcelled bodhi; they each caused beings as
numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru to progress to the ground

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
133
of irreversibility on the bodhisattva path; they each caused beings
as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru to acquire the purified
wisdom eye by which one sees the uniform equality of all dharmas
as seen by the Tathāgata; they each caused beings as numerous as
the atoms in Mount Sumeru to dwell securely in the powers and in
the ocean of vows and to use inexhaustible wisdom to produce skill­
ful means to purify the buddha lands; and they each caused beings
as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru to all become securely
established in Vairocana’s ocean of great vows and then be born into
the family of the Tathāgata.
At that time, from within the light rays of those bodhisattvas,
there simultaneously arose voices which spoke these verses:
From within these light rays come forth wondrous voices
everywhere pervading all the lands of the ten directions,
proclaiming the meritorious qualities of the sons of the Buddha
and their ability to enter the marvelous path to bodhi.
For an ocean of kalpas, they tirelessly cultivated the practices
and enabled suffering beings to gain liberation,
doing so with minds that were never inferior or weary.
These sons of the Buddha well entered these skillful means.
They cultivated all the countless and boundless skillful means
without exception, doing so throughout the ocean of all kalpas.
Of all the Dharma gateways, there are none they have not entered
even as they constantly proclaimed the quiescence of their nature.
They have completely cultivated to the utmost
all the vows of all buddhas of the three periods of time
and then thereby benefited all beings
even as they personally practiced pure actions.
They have traveled everywhere throughout the ten directions,
having no assembly of any buddha to which they do not go.
In all cases, they used an ocean of extremely profound wisdom
to enter those tathāgatas’ dharma of quiescence.
Every one of these light rays is boundless in its reach.
All of them enter an inconceivable number of lands.
The purified wisdom eye is everywhere able to see
the sphere of action of all these bodhisattvas.
The bodhisattvas are able to dwell on the tip of a single hair
and everywhere cause the quaking of the lands of the ten directions
even without causing any of their beings to feel frightened.
Such is their ground of pure skillful means.

134

The Flower Adornment Sutra
They manifest countless bodies within every atom
and also reveal many different adorned kṣetras.
In one mind-moment, they enable everyone to see deaths and rebirths
and acquire the adornment of the unimpeded resolve.
They are able to reveal, even within the space of a single kṣaṇa,
all kalpas throughout the three periods of time [while enabling beings]
to know the body as illusory, with no substance or marks,
and to gain an unimpeded realization of the nature of dharmas.
They are able to enter all of Samantabhadra’s supreme practices
and become those whom all beings delight in beholding.
The sons of the Buddha able to dwell in these gateways to the Dharma
bring forth from within these light rays the loud roar [of the Lion].
At that time, because the Bhagavat wished to cause the entire great
assembly of bodhisattvas to acquire the spiritual powers of the
Tathāgata’s boundless sphere of action, he emanated light from
between his brows. This light was called “the light of all bodhisat­
tvas’ wisdom everywhere brightly illuminating the treasuries of the
ten directions.” In form, it resembled a cloud of lamps emanating
the colored light of jewels which everywhere illuminated all buddha
kṣetras of the ten directions, thereby causing the lands and beings in
them to all be clearly revealed.
It also shook the entire network of worlds and showed countless
buddhas within every atom. Adapting to the different natures and
aspirations of beings, it everywhere sent down the rain from clouds
of wheels of the sublime Dharma of all buddhas of the three peri­
ods of time and revealed the ocean of the Tathāgata’s pāramitās. It
also rained down countless clouds of emancipations which enabled
beings to achieve everlasting liberation from saṃsāra. Furthermore, it
rained down clouds of the great vows of all buddhas which revealed
within all worlds throughout the ten directions Samantabhadra
Bodhisattva’s sites of enlightenment with their assembled congrega­
tions. Having done this, it circumambulated the Buddha to his right,
and then entered the bottom of his feet.
At that time, an immense lotus flower suddenly rose up directly
in front of the Buddha. That flower possessed ten kinds of adorn­
ments which no other lotus flower could rival, namely: its stem was
made of many kinds of inlaid jewels; its pod was made of sovereign
maṇi jewels; its petals were made of all the many kinds of jewels from
throughout the Dharma realm; its stamens were made of all kinds of
fragrant maṇi jewels; its pedestal was adorned with jambūnada gold;

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
135
a marvelous net emanating pure colored lights was suspended over
it; in but a single mind-moment, it revealed the boundless spiritual
transformations of the buddhas; it was able to everywhere send forth
all kinds of sounds; sovereign maṇi jewels reflected images of the
Buddha’s form bodies; and amidst those sounds, it was able to every­
where expound on the conduct and vows cultivated by all bodhisat­
tvas.
After this flower appeared, then, in the space of but a single
mind-moment, there emerged from the Tathāgata’s white hair mark
a bodhisattva-mahāsattva named Supreme Sound of All Dharmas
who, appearing simultaneously with a congregation of bodhisatt­
vas as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds, circumambu­
lated the Tathāgata countless times to his right. After bowing down
in reverence at the Buddha’s feet, Supreme Sound of All Dharmas
Bodhisattva then sat down on the lotus pedestal and that congrega­
tion of bodhisattvas each sat in order atop the lotus flower’s stamens.
That Supreme Sound of All Dharmas Bodhisattva completely fath­
omed the deep Dharma realm, became filled with great joy, entered
the Buddha’s sphere of practice with unobstructed knowledge,
entered the unfathomable ocean of the Buddha’s Dharma body, and
traveled to visit the buddhas in all kṣetras. All the pores of his body
displayed spiritual superknowledges. In every mind-moment, he
everywhere contemplated the entire Dharma realm. The buddhas of
the ten directions shared their powers with him and enabled him to
everywhere dwell securely in all samādhis by which, to the end of all
future kalpas, he would forever see all buddhas’ boundless Dharma
realm bodies possessed of an ocean of meritorious qualities together
with all their samādhis, liberations, and transformations produced
by the spiritual superknowledges.
Then, in the midst of that congregation, assisted by the Buddha’s
awesome spiritual powers, he surveyed the ten directions and then
spoke these verses:
The body of the Buddha fills up the entire Dharma realm,
everywhere appears before all beings, and, adapting to conditions,
goes forth in response to them, having no place he does not pervade,
even as he still constantly abides here on this bodhi throne.
Within each and every pore of the Tathāgata,
buddhas as numerous as the atoms in all kṣetras sit,
all of them surrounded by congregations of bodhisattvas
as they expound upon the supreme practices of Samantabhadra.

136

The Flower Adornment Sutra
As the Tathāgata abides serenely on the bodhi throne,
even a single hair reveals an ocean of numerous kṣetras.
The appearances in each and every hair pore are also just so.
In this way, he is present everywhere throughout the Dharma realm.
In each and every kṣetra, he sits64 serenely
even as he is pervasively present throughout all the kṣetras.
The bodhisattvas of the ten directions assemble like clouds.
None of them fail to come to meet him at the site of enlightenment.
Oceans of bodhisattvas with meritorious qualities and radiance
who are as numerous as the atoms contained in all kṣetras
are everywhere present in the congregations of the tathāgatas
where they completely pervade even the entire Dharma realm.
All the kṣetras contained in all the atoms throughout the Dharma realm
all manifest their appearance within all the congregations.
The sphere of cognition of the division bodies such as these
is able to be established through the practices of Samantabhadra.
Within the congregations of all buddhas,
supremely wise bodhisattvas all peacefully sit.
On hearing the Dharma, they each become filled with joy
and then everywhere cultivate the practices for measureless kalpas.
They have already entered the vast vows of Samantabhadra
and each of them has developed the many dharmas of the Buddha.
In the ocean of the Dharma of Vairocana Buddha, they have cultivated
and become able to realize the ground of the Tathāgata.
Those awakened by Samantabhadra Bodhisattva
are all joyously praised by all tathāgatas.
Having already gained all buddhas’ great spiritual superknowledges,
they flow everywhere without exception in the Dharma realm.
They always manifest clouds of bodies filling all places
which are as numerous as the atoms within all kṣetras
and everywhere emanate great light for the benefit of beings.
Then each rains Dharma rain for them in ways that suit their minds.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of King of the Wisdom of the Light of the Lotus
Who Contemplates all Supreme Dharmas. Assisted by the Buddha’s
awesome spiritual powers, he surveyed the ten directions and then
spoke these verses:
The extremely profound wisdom of the Tathāgata
everywhere enters the Dharma realm.
It is able to accord with transformations in the three periods of time
and thus serves for the world as an illuminating guide.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
137
The same Dharma body possessed by all buddhas
depends on nothing and is free of any differentiating aspects.
Even so, adapting to the minds of all beings,
it enables them to see the Buddha’s physical form.
Having completely fulfilled the realization of all-knowledge,
they everywhere know all dharmas.
There are none among them all who do not appear
even within every one of all these lands.
The body of the Buddha, its radiance,
and its inconceivable physical marks—
Those beings who have faith and delight in them
are all allowed to see them in accordance with whatever suits them.
Even from within a single buddha’s body,
countless buddhas are transformationally created.
Their thunderous sound pervades all the many kṣetras,
as they expound on the Dharma as deep as the ocean.
Within each and every pore,
a web of light pervades all the ten directions,
proclaiming the Dharma with the Buddha’s sublime voice
and training even those who are difficult to train.
From within the light of the Tathāgata,
there always emanates a deep and sublime voice
praising the buddha’s ocean of meritorious qualities
as well as the conduct practiced by the bodhisattvas.
The Buddha turns the wheel of right Dharma
which is measureless and boundless.
The Dharma which he proclaims is unequaled
and such that those of but shallow wisdom could never fathom.
He manifests bodies realizing right enlightenment
even within every world.
In each of them he brings forth spiritual transformations,
thus filling the entire Dharma realm.
Each and every body of the Tathāgata
manifests buddhas as numerous as all beings.
In all of the kṣetras as numerous as atoms,
they everywhere manifest the power of spiritual superknowledges.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of Wisdom Light of Dharma Joy. Assisted by
the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, he surveyed the ten direc­
tions and then spoke these verses:

138

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The body of the Buddha always appears
and completely fills the Dharma realm.
It forever expounds the Dharma with a far-reaching voice,
with which he everywhere shakes the lands of the ten directions.
The Tathāgata everywhere manifests bodies
which pervasively enter the world.
Adapting to the aspirations of beings,
he manifests the power of the spiritual superknowledges.
The Buddha adapts to the minds of beings
and thus everywhere appears before them.
Whatever it is that beings see,
this is all due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers.
The reach of his light is boundless
and his proclamation of the Dharma is also measureless.
It is in accordance with their wisdom that the sons of the Buddha
are able to penetrate it and are able to contemplate it.
The body of the Buddha is unproduced
and yet he is able to display the appearance of being born.
The nature of dharmas is like empty space,
yet all buddhas abide within it.
He has neither any dwelling nor any going anywhere,
and yet one may see the Buddha in every place.
His radiance has no place it does not pervade
and his fame is heard even afar.
He has no substance, has no place in which he dwells,
and also has no birth which can be apprehended.
Being both signless and formless,
whatever appears is like a mere reflection.
The Buddha adapts to the minds of beings
and manifests a great cloud of Dharma for them.
Using many different kinds of skillful means,
he instructs, awakens, and trains them.
In all worlds, one sees the Buddha
seated at the site of enlightenment,
surrounded by a great congregation,
illuminating the lands of the ten directions.
The bodies of all buddhas
all have endless signs.
Although their manifestations are measureless,
their forms and signs never come to an end.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
139
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of Fragrant Flaming Light and Universally
Radiant Wisdom. Assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual pow­
ers, he surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
All the bodhisattvas within this congregation
have entered the inconceivable ground of the Buddha.
Each and every one of them is able to see
the spiritual powers of all the buddhas.
Their wisdom bodies are able to everywhere enter
even into the atoms of all the kṣetras,
seeing their bodies there within them,
everywhere seeing all the buddhas.
Like reflections, they appear in the many kṣetras,
wherever all the tathāgatas reside.
In all those places, they reveal all the deeds done
through the use of the spiritual superknowledges.
They have already cultivated to radiant purity
all the conduct and vows of Samantabhadra
and have become able within all the kṣetras
to everywhere see the buddhas’ spiritual transformations.
Their bodies dwell in every place
and they remain impartial in all things.
With wisdom they are able to practice in this way
and enter the Buddha’s sphere of action.
They have already realized the Tathāgata’s wisdom
with which they equally illuminate the entire Dharma realm
and everywhere enter all the oceans of kṣetras
present there within the pores of the Buddha.
Within all the lands of all the buddhas,
they manifest the power of their spiritual superknowledges
and appear in many different kinds of bodies
in which they are also known by many different names.
They are able in but a single mind-moment
to everywhere manifest all kinds of spiritual transformations
by which, in the sites of enlightenment, they gain right enlightenment
and then turn the wheel of the wondrous Dharma.
Within their bodhisattva samādhis,
they are able in but a single mind-moment
to appear in all the vast kṣetras
throughout an inconceivable number of koṭīs of kalpas.

140

The Flower Adornment Sutra
In all the lands of the buddhas,
each and every one of these bodhisattvas
everywhere enters into the bodies of buddhas,
doing so both boundlessly and endlessly.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of Lion Sprint Wisdom Light. Assisted by the
Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, he surveyed the ten directions
and then spoke these verses:
Vairocana Buddha
is able to turn the wheel of right Dharma
in all lands throughout the Dharma realm,
pervading them all like a cloud.
In all the great oceans of worlds
throughout the ten directions,
by the power of the Buddha’s spiritual superknowledges and vows,
the wheel of the Dharma turns in every place.
Within the vast congregations
throughout all the kṣetras,
with names that differ wherever he is,
he expounds on the sublime Dharma, adapting to whatever is fitting.
The great awesome powers of the Tathāgata
are realized through the vows of Samantabhadra.
Among all the lands, there are none
to which his marvelous voice does not reach.
Bodies of the Buddha as numerous as the atoms in a kṣetra
everywhere rain down the Dharma rain.
Unborn and devoid of any differentiating aspects,
he appears within all worlds.
That marvelous voice completely expounds
on all the works he has carried out throughout the past
across the course of countless koṭīs of kalpas
within the kṣetras contained in every atom.
Webs of light everywhere pervade
all the lands as numerous as the atoms of the ten directions.
Within all those rays of light, there are buddhas
who everywhere teach all the many types of beings.
The Buddha’s body, devoid of any differentiating aspects,
fills up the entire Dharma realm.
He is able to allow beings to see his form bodies which,
adapting to their circumstances, skillfully train them.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
141
In all kṣetras throughout the three periods of time,
the Master Guide of all the congregations
appears with many different names,
teaches for their benefit, and allows them all to see.
Everyone in this congregation is able to hear
the wheel of the wondrous Dharma
as it is turned by all the tathāgatas
throughout the past, the future, and the present.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of Treasury of Meritorious Qualities of the
Dharma Ocean’s Wisdom. Assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spir­
itual powers, he surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these
verses:
The sons of the Buddha within this assembly
have skillfully cultivated all-knowledge.
These men have already become able to enter
gateways of skillful means such as these.
In each and every land,
they everywhere proclaim with far-reaching voices,
explaining the sphere of the Buddha’s actions
so that this is heard throughout the kṣetras of the ten directions.
In every successive mind-moment,
they everywhere contemplate all dharmas.
Dwelling securely on the ground of true suchness,
they completely comprehend the ocean of all dharmas.
In the bodies of each and every buddha,
[there is seen]65 their cultivation of the pāramitās
and their purification of lands
throughout an inconceivable number of koṭīs of kalpas.
Even within each and every atom,
they are able to realize all dharmas,
doing so in just such an unimpeded manner as this
as they travel throughout the lands of the ten directions.
In each and every buddha kṣetra,
they go to pay their respects to them all without exception,
witnessing the buddhas’ powers of the spiritual superknowledges
and entering the domain of the buddhas’ actions.
There is no place in the Dharma realm
where the far-reaching voices of the buddhas are not heard.
These bodhisattvas are able to completely understand them
and thoroughly enter the ocean of their voices.

142

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Throughout an ocean of kalpas, they expound with a wondrous voice.
Their voices are the same, no different.
Those whose knowledge reaches throughout the three periods of time
enter the ground on which their voices resound.
The sounds of all beings
as well as the miraculous voice of the buddhas—
Those who have acquired the knowledge of sounds
are able to completely understand them all.
They move on from their grounds to then reach other grounds
and then come to dwell on the ground of the powers.
It is by diligently cultivating for koṭīs of kalpas
that the dharmas they acquire are of this very sort.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that
congregation by the name of Universally Bright Lamp of Wisdom.
Assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, he surveyed the
ten directions and then spoke these verses:
All of the tathāgatas
have left the many signs far behind.
If one is able to understand this dharma,
then he will see the Guiding Teacher of the World.
Within the bodhisattvas’ samādhis,
the light of their wisdom everywhere illuminates.
Thus they are able to know all buddhas’
essential nature of sovereign mastery.
If one sees the true body of the Buddha,
then one awakens to the extremely profound Dharma,
everywhere contemplates the Dharma realm,
and then takes on bodies in accordance with one’s vows.
Born from an ocean of merit,
they dwell securely on the grounds of wisdom,
contemplate all dharmas,
and cultivate the supreme path.
In the kṣetras of all the buddhas
and wherever all tathāgatas dwell—
In just this way, throughout the Dharma realm,
they all behold his true body.
Having diligently cultivated for koṭīs of kalpas
in the vast kṣetras throughout the ten directions,
they are able to roam with right and universal knowledge
in the ocean of all dharmas.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
143
His singular and solid body
may be seen even in every atom.
Though unproduced and signless,
it appears everywhere in all lands.
Adapting to the minds of all beings,
it everywhere appears directly before them
and uses many different means of instruction and training
to swiftly enable them to turn toward the path to buddhahood.
Because of the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
these bodhisattvas come forth and appear.
Aided by the powers of the Buddha,
they everywhere behold all the tathāgatas.
The measureless awesome spiritual power
of the Master Guide of all the congregations
awakens all the bodhisattvas
everywhere throughout the Dharma realm.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of Floral Flaming Topknot of Universally
Radiant Wisdom. Assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual pow­
ers, he surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
There resounds within all lands,
the subtle and marvelous voice everywhere proclaiming
and widely praising the Buddha’s meritorious qualities
which fill up the entire Dharma realm.
The Buddha takes the Dharma as his body
which is as pure as empty space.
The many physical forms he manifests,
he enables to enter this Dharma.
Wherever there are those who have deep faith and joy in it,
they are then gathered in and sustained by the Buddha.
One should realize that persons such as these
can develop the wisdom that completely understands the Buddha.
Those who are possessed of but little wisdom
remain unable to know this Dharma.
Those who are possessed of the purified wisdom eye
only then are capable of perceiving this.
If one is assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual power
in contemplating all dharmas,
then, when entering it, abiding in it, and emerging from it,
whatever one beholds will all be completely understood.

144

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Within all the dharmas,
the Dharma gateways are boundlessly many.
By perfecting the realization of all-knowledge
one thereby enters the ocean of the profound Dharma.
Even while abiding securely in the buddha land,
he goes forth and appears in all places,
yet he has neither any going nor coming.
The Dharma of all buddhas is just like this.
In the ocean of all beings,
the bodies of the Buddha appear like reflections
and adapt to the differences in their understandings.
It is in this way that they behold the Master Guide.
Within all of his pores—
In each of them he manifests spiritual powers.
By cultivating the vows of Samantabhadra,
those who attain purity are able to behold this.
Using each and every one of these bodies,
the Buddha turns the wheel of Dharma in every place,
thus reaching everywhere throughout the Dharma realm.
Whether through thought or description, no one can apprehend this.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that
congregation by the name of Endless Light of Awesome Virtue and
Wisdom. Assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, he sur­
veyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
He sits at the site of enlightenment in place after place
within each and every buddha kṣetra,
surrounded by a congregation,
having utterly vanquished the armies of Māra.
The Buddha’s body emanates light
that everywhere fills the ten directions.
As befits what is appropriate, he then manifests appearances
in which the forms and features are not of but a single sort.
His radiance completely fills
the regions within each and every atom
in which one everywhere sees the lands of the ten directions
in each of their many different variations.
Of the many different and countless kṣetras
within the oceans of kṣetras throughout the ten directions,
some are all entirely level and pure,
and some are composed of sapphire jewels.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
145
Some are inverted, some dwell in a lateral posture,
some are shaped like closed lotus flower buds,
some are round, and some are rectangular—
They appear with many different kinds of shapes and features.
He is unimpeded in traveling around everywhere
throughout all the kṣetras within the Dharma realm,
appearing in the midst of all the congregations,
forever turning the wheel of the wonderful Dharma.
The Buddha’s body is inconceivable.
Lands all reside entirely within it.
In all of the places within them,
The Guide of the World expounds on the true Dharma.
In his turning of the wheel of the wondrous Dharma,
there is no difference in the nature of dharmas.
Relying upon a single true principle,
he expounds on the characteristics of all dharmas.
The Buddha uses a perfectly full voice
in his explication of the genuine principle
while adapting to differences in individual understandings
as he reveals endlessly many gateways into the Dharma.
Within all the kśetras, one sees the Buddha
sitting in the sites of enlightenment.
The bodies of the Buddha appear like reflections
and have no production or destruction that can be apprehended.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of Universally Radiant Wisdom of the Dharma
Realm. Assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, he sur­
veyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
As for the inconceivable physical signs
of the Tathāgata’s subtle and wonderful body,
whoever sees them is filled with joyous delight
and feels reverence and faithful aspiration for the Dharma.
All of the physical marks of the Buddha’s body
reveal the presence of countless buddhas
who have everywhere entered the worlds of the ten directions
even within each and every atom.
Within the oceans of lands throughout the ten directions,
countlessly and boundlessly many buddhas
each manifest their spiritual superknowledges
even in each successive mind-moment.

146

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The bodhisattvas possessed of great wisdom
deeply enter the ocean of Dharma.
Assisted by the powers of the buddhas,
they are able to know of these skillful means.
Wherever there are those who securely dwell
in the conduct and vows of Samantabhadra,
they behold those many lands
and the spiritual powers of all buddhas.
Wherever there are those who are possessed of resolute faith
as well as all the great vows,
they become completely possessed of deep wisdom
and reach a penetrating comprehension of all dharmas.
They are able then to contemplate
in each and every body of the buddhas
their unimpeded forms and voices
and reach a complete comprehension of their spheres of action.
They are able through [such contemplation of] the Buddha’s bodies
to securely dwell in the sphere of wisdom’s practices,
swiftly enter the ground of the Tathāgata,
and everywhere gather in [beings] throughout the Dharma realm.
They are able in but a single mind-moment
to enable lands such as these
as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra
to appear even within each and every atom.
All these lands as well as all these works
performed with the aid of the spiritual superknowledges
all appear even within but a single kṣetra.
The bodhisattva’s powers are of this very sort.
At that time, there was another bodhisattva-mahāsattva in that con­
gregation by the name of Unimpeded Wisdom with the Power of
Vigor. Assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, he sur­
veyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The Buddha expounds with a single sublime voice
heard everywhere throughout the kṣetras of the ten directions
which fully possesses all the many kinds of voices.
Its Dharma rains are all completely pervasive.
Using the ocean of all words and phrases
and voices adapted to all types of beings,
he turns the wheel of pure Dharma
within all the buddha kṣetras.

Chapter 2 — The Manifest Appearances of the Tathāgata
147
Within all lands, [beings] see
all of the Buddha’s spiritual transformations
and hear the sound of the Buddha teaching the Dharma.
Then once they have heard it, they progress toward bodhi.
In all lands throughout the Dharma realm
and within each and every atom,
through the power of his liberations, the Tathāgata
everywhere manifests bodies within them.
The Dharma body, the same as empty space
presents no obstacles and has no differentiating aspects.
His physical forms are like reflected images
in which the many different signs appear.
Those reflected images have no place where they abide
and, like empty space, they are devoid of any essential nature.
Those people who are possessed of vast wisdom
fully comprehend their identity.
The body of the Buddha cannot be grasped.
It is unproduced and has nothing which it initiates or does.
In responding to beings, it everywhere appears before them
even as it remains as impartial as empty space itself.
All the buddhas of the ten directions
completely enter a single pore.
Each of them manifests spiritual superknowledges
which the wisdom eye is able to observe.
The vow power of Vairocana Buddha
extends everywhere throughout the Dharma realm.
In every one of its lands,
he constantly turns the unexcelled wheel.
Even if all buddhas joined in describing
the spiritual transformations appearing in but a single hair
and did so throughout the course of countless kalpas,
they would still never succeed in reaching the end of them.
One ought to realize that, just as due to the Buddha’s spiritual pow­
ers, there have gathered here in this four-continent land’s site of
enlightenment a congregation of bodhisattvas from each of the ten
directions as numerous as the atoms in a koṭī of oceans of worlds, so
too is this so in the same way in all the sites of enlightenment in every
one of the four-continent lands in all the oceans of worlds.
The End of Chapter Two

148

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 3
The Samādhis of Samantabhadra
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva-mahāsattva sat down in
front of the Tathāgata on a lion throne atop a lotus flower dais and,
aided by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, entered a samādhi.
This samādhi was called “the Vairocana tathāgatagarbha body of all
buddhas samādhi” by which one enters the uniformly equal nature
of all buddhas and becomes able to reveal their many reflected images
throughout the Dharma realm. It is as vast and unimpeded as empty
space. Of all the eddies throughout the ocean of the Dharma realm,
there are none that do not enter into it.
It produces all the samādhi dharmas and is everywhere able to
envelope and hold within it the ten directions of the Dharma realm.
The ocean of wisdom light of all buddhas of the three periods of
time all comes forth from this. It is able to reveal the ocean of every­
thing established throughout the ten directions. It contains within
it the powers and liberations of all buddhas and the wisdom of the
bodhisattvas. It is able to cause the atoms in all lands to be able to
completely include the boundless Dharma realm. It brings to com­
pletion the ocean of meritorious qualities of all buddhas, reveals the
Tathāgata’s ocean of great vows, and ensures that the dissemination
and preservation of all Dharma wheels of all buddhas will never be
cut off.
And just as in this world Samantabhadra Bodhisattva entered this
samādhi in the presence of the Bhagavat, in this same way, through­
out the ten directions of the Dharma realm and the realm of empty
space, and throughout the three periods of time, in the realm of the
subtle and unimpeded, within the vast radiance, in what the Buddha
eye sees, where the Buddha’s powers are able to reach, and in what is
manifested within the body of the Buddha, in all lands as well as in all
the atoms in these lands, in each and every atom where there are bud­
dha lands as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds—before
each and every buddha where there are Samantabhadra Bodhisattvas
as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds, they all entered this
“Vairocana tathāgatagarbha body of all buddhas samādhi.”

150

The Flower Adornment Sutra
At that time, every one of those Samantabhadra Bodhisattvas
experienced all buddhas throughout the ten directions appearing
directly before them, whereupon all those tathāgatas praised them in
a single voice, saying:
It is good indeed, good indeed, Son of Good Family, that you have
been able to enter into this “Vairocana tathāgatagarbha body of all
buddhas samādhi.” Sons of the Buddha, that this occurs is because
you are all aided by all buddhas of the ten directions. It is because
of the power of the original vows of Vairocana Tathāgata. And it
is also because of the power resulting from your cultivation of the
conduct and vows of all buddhas. In particular, this is:
Due to the ability to turn the Dharma wheel of all buddhas;
Due to revealing the ocean of wisdom of all tathāgatas;
Due to everywhere illuminating the ocean of everything without
exception that is established throughout the ten directions;
Due to enabling all beings to purify themselves of their various
defilements so that they succeed in attaining purity;
Due to everywhere gathering in those in all great lands without
having anything to which one is attached;
Due to achieving unimpeded deep penetration into all buddhas’
spheres of action;
Due to everywhere revealing the meritorious qualities of all bud­
dhas;
Due to the ability to penetrate the true character of all dharmas
and increase wisdom;
Due to contemplating all Dharma gateways;
Due to completely understanding the faculties of all beings; and
Due to being able to retain the entire ocean of teaching scriptures
of all the buddhas, the tathāgatas.
At that time, all buddhas of the ten directions immediately bestowed
on Samantabhadra Bodhisattva-mahāsattva:
The knowledge that is able to enter the power of all-knowledge;
The knowledge that enters the boundless Dharma realm;
The knowledge that brings about the complete development of the
sphere of action of all buddhas;
The knowledge that knows the creation and destruction of all oceans
of worlds;
The knowledge that knows the vastness of all realms of beings;
The knowledge that dwells in all buddhas’ extremely profound libera­
tions and nondifferentiating samādhis;

Chapter 3 — The Samādhis of Samantabhadra
151
The knowledge that enters the ocean of all bodhisattvas’ faculties;
The knowledge that knows the ocean of all beings’ languages and elo­
quently turns the wheel of the Dharma;
The knowledge that everywhere enters the bodies in all the oceans of
worlds throughout the Dharma realm; and
The knowledge that acquires the voices of all buddhas.
And just as in this world, in the presence of the Buddha, Samantabhadra
Bodhisattva received the buddhas’ bestowal of knowledges such
as these, so too did this occur in this very same way for all the
Samantabhadras in all the oceans of worlds as well as in each of the
atoms in all those oceans of worlds. How could this be so? It was
because this is the way it is when one realizes that samādhi.
At this time, the buddhas of the ten directions each extended their
right hands and rubbed the crown of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva’s
head. From their hands which were all adorned with the major marks
and secondary characteristics, a marvelous web of light released a
fragrant stream of flaming radiance. They also emanated all of the
different marvelous sounds of all buddhas as well as miraculous
phenomena produced by their spiritual superknowledges. There
also appeared within them the oceans of Samantabhadra’s vows of
all past, present, and future bodhisattvas, the Dharma wheels of all
tathāgatas, and the reflected images of the buddhas of the three peri­
ods of time.
And just as in this world Samantabhadra Bodhisattva was rubbed
on the crown of the head by the buddhas of the ten directions, so
too was this also so in all the oceans of worlds and in every atom in
those oceans of worlds where all of those other Samantabhadras were
all also rubbed on the crown of the head by the buddhas of the ten
directions.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva arose from this samādhi.
At the same time that he arose from this samādhi, he then also arose
from an ocean of samādhi gateways as numerous as the atoms in all
oceans of worlds. For instance:
He arose from the samādhi gateway by which one realizes the knowl­
edge of the non-differentiating skillful means in each successive
mind-moment of the three periods of time;
He arose from the samādhi gateway by which one knows all atoms
throughout the entire Dharma realm during all three periods of
time;

152

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He arose from the samādhi gateway that shows all buddha kṣetras
throughout the three periods of time;
He arose from the samādhi gateway that shows the dwellings of all
beings;
He arose from the samādhi gateway that knows the minds of the ocean
of all beings;
He arose from the samādhi gateway that knows the different names of
all beings;
He arose from the samādhi gateway that knows all the different places
throughout the ten directions of the Dharma realm;
He arose from the samādhi gateway that knows that, within every
atom, there are boundless vast clouds of emanation bodies of the
buddha; and
He arose from the samādhi gateway in which one expounds on the
ocean of principles and implications of all dharmas.
When Samantabhadra Bodhisattva arose from samādhi gateways
such as these, all of those bodhisattvas there acquired:
Clouds of oceans of samādhis as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds;
Clouds of oceans of dhāraṇīs as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of
worlds;
Clouds of oceans of dharmas and skillful means as numerous as the
atoms in an ocean of worlds;
Clouds of oceans of gateways of eloquence as numerous as the atoms
in an ocean of worlds;
Clouds of oceans of cultivation as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds;
Clouds of oceans of the light of wisdom as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds which everywhere illuminate the treasury of meri­
torious qualities of all tathāgatas throughout the Dharma realm;
Clouds of oceans of all tathāgatas’ powers, wisdom, and nondiscrimi­
nating skillful means as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of
worlds;
Clouds of oceans of all tathāgatas as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds who were each revealing manifold kṣetras in every one of
their pores; and
Clouds of oceans of every one of the bodhisattvas as numerous as the
atoms in an ocean of worlds in which they each manifested descent
from the Tuṣita Heaven palace, taking birth, realizing buddhahood,
turning the wheel of Dharma, entering parinirvāṇa, and so forth.

Chapter 3 — The Samādhis of Samantabhadra
153
And just as the congregations of bodhisattvas in this world acquired
benefits such as these when Samantabhadra Bodhisattva arose from
samādhi, so too was this also so in all the oceans of worlds as well as
in every atom among all the atoms in those oceans of worlds.
At that time, in all the oceans of worlds throughout the ten direc­
tions, due to the awesome spiritual power of all buddhas and also
due to the power of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva’s samādhis, there
occurred a subtle trembling in all of them, whereupon every one of
those worlds became adorned with the many kinds of precious jewels
and also emanated marvelous voices which expounded on all dhar­
mas.
Furthermore, within the oceanic congregations at the sites of
enlightenment of all tathāgatas, there everywhere rained down ten
kinds of clouds consisting of great sovereign maṇi jewels. What then
were those ten? They were:
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels forming banners of marvelous golden
stars;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels emanating dazzling illumination;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels trailing spheres of jewels;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels containing treasuries of the many
kinds of jewels in which there appeared images of bodhisattvas;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels proclaiming and praising the names
of the buddhas;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels emanating abundant flaming radiance
everywhere illuminating the sites of enlightenment in all buddha
kṣetras;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels illuminating the different kinds of
spiritual transformations throughout the ten directions;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels praising the meritorious qualities of
all bodhisattvas;
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels emanating blazing light like the sun;
and
Clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels emanating mind-pleasing musical
sounds heard everywhere throughout the ten directions.
After everywhere raining down ten kinds of clouds of sovereign maṇi
jewels such as these, from within all the pores of all tathāgatas, there
streamed forth rays of light and from within those light rays, there
came a voice which spoke these verses:
Samantabhadra dwells everywhere in all kṣetras,
sitting on jeweled lotus flowers, beheld by congregations.

154

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Of all the spiritual superknowledges, none do not appear.
Of the countless samādhis, he is able to enter them all.
Samantabhadra constantly uses many different types of bodies
which flow throughout the Dharma realm, filling all places.
By the power of samādhis, the superknowledges, and skillful means,
his perfect voice extensively teaches all without obstruction.
Within all the kṣetras, wherever the buddhas dwell,
in all kinds of samādhis, he manifests the spiritual superknowledges.
Each and every spiritual superknowledge everywhere pervades
all the lands of the ten directions without exception.
And just as this is so in all kṣetras where the tathāgatas dwell,
so too is this also so even within all the atoms in those lands.
The phenomena manifested by the samādhis and spiritual powers
all occur there through the power of the vows of Vairocana.
The appearance of Samantabhadra’s body is like empty space.
It dwells in reliance on true suchness and hence not on any land.
He adapts to the aspirations in the minds of beings,
manifesting his universally appearing bodies equally for all.
Samantabhadra calmly abides in all the great vows.
Having gained this measureless power of spiritual superknowledges,
in all the kṣetras where the bodies of all buddhas abide,
he manifests his appearance and goes to pay his respects to them.
Within the boundless oceans of all congregations,
his division bodies dwelling there are also countless.
The lands in which he appears are all purified.
Even in but a single kṣaṇa, he sees many kalpas.
As Samantabhadra peacefully dwells in every kṣetra,
the spiritual superknowledges he manifests are incomparable.
Thus he causes quaking in the ten directions, in none not pervasively,
while enabling all who are watching to succeed in witnessing this.
The wisdom, meritorious qualities, and powers of all buddhas—
He has completely fulfilled all these different kinds of great dharmas.
Using all his samādhis and gateways of skillful means,
he reveals his bodhi practices from throughout the past.
Such powers of sovereign mastery as these are inconceivable.
They are all manifested throughout the lands of the ten directions.
In order to reveal his universal entry into all the samādhis,
within the buddhas’ light clouds, they praise his meritorious qualities.
At that time, all those in that congregation of bodhisattvas faced
Samantabhadra, placed their palms together, gazed up in admiration,

Chapter 3 — The Samādhis of Samantabhadra
155
and, aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, joined their voices in
praising him, saying:
You have been born from the Dharma of the buddhas
and also have come forth due to the power of the Tathāgata’s vows.
Identical with true suchness and like a treasury of empty space,
you have already purified this Dharma body.
Within the congregations in all buddhas’ kṣetras,
Samantabhadra everywhere dwells in those places.
He who is radiant with an ocean of meritorious qualities and wisdom
equally illumines the ten directions and has none where he is not seen.
With his vast ocean of meritorious qualities, Samantabhadra
goes everywhere in the ten directions and draws near to the buddhas.
To all the kṣetras even within all the atoms,
he is able to go to visit them all and appear clearly there.
O Son of the Buddha, we always see you
wherever the tathāgatas dwell, drawing near to them all
and abiding in the genuine spheres of samādhi
for kalpas as numerous as the atoms in all lands.
The Buddha’s Son is able to use the universally pervasive body
to go to all the lands of the ten directions
to rescue and liberate all those in the great ocean of beings,
having no atom in the entire Dharma realm that he does not enter.
He enters into all atoms throughout the Dharma realm.
His body is endless and free of any differentiating aspects.
Like empty space he is pervasively present in them all,
expounding on the vast Dharma of the Tathāgata.
He who is radiant with the light of all meritorious qualities
is as vast as a cloud and possessed of especially supreme powers.
He travels to meet everyone in the ocean of beings
and then teaches the peerless Dharma practiced by the buddhas.
In order to liberate beings, throughout an ocean of kalpas,
he cultivated all the supreme practices of Samantabhadra.
In expounding on all dharmas, he is like an immense cloud.
The range of his voice is so vast that no one fails to hear it.
How is it that these lands are established?
How is it that the buddhas come forth and appear?
And also, those matters having to do with the ocean of all beings—
Please explain their meaning in accordance with reality.
Everyone in the ocean of this immeasurably vast congregation
abides in reverence before the Venerable One,

156

The Flower Adornment Sutra
requesting him to turn the wheel of the pure and wondrous Dharma.
All the buddhas join in rejoicing.
The End of Chapter Three

Chapter 4
The Formation of the Worlds
At that time, aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Samantabhadra
Bodhisattva-mahāsattva everywhere contemplated the oceans of
all worlds, the oceans of all beings, the oceans of all buddhas, the
ocean of the entire Dharma realm, the oceans of all beings’ karma,
the oceans of all beings’ faculties and aspirations, the oceans of all
buddhas’ Dharma wheels, the ocean of all three periods of time, the
oceans of the vow power of all tathāgatas, and the oceans of spiritual
transformations of all tathāgatas. Then, having contemplated in this
way, he told all the bodhisattvas in the oceanic congregation at that
site of enlightenment:
Sons of the Buddha:
The pure knowledge possessed by the buddhas, the bhagavats, by
which they know the creation and destruction of all oceans of
worlds is inconceivable;
The knowledge by which they know the oceans of all beings’
karma is inconceivable;
The knowledge by which they know the oceans of everything
established throughout the entire Dharma realm is inconceiv­
able;
The knowledge by which they speak of all the boundless oceans
of buddhas is inconceivable;
The knowledge by which they penetrate the oceans of all aspira­
tions, understandings, and faculties is inconceivable;
The knowledge by which they know all three periods of time in
but a single mind-moment is inconceivable;
The knowledge by which they reveal all tathāgatas’ measureless
oceans of vows is inconceivable;
The knowledge by which they reveal the oceans of all buddhas’
spiritual transformations is inconceivable;
The knowledge by which they turn the wheel of Dharma is incon­
ceivable;
Their establishment of an ocean of expository teaching is incon­
ceivable;
Their pure buddha bodies are inconceivable;66

158

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Their boundless oceans of forms and characteristics emanating
pervasive illumination are inconceivable;
Their major marks and secondary signs, all of which are pure, are
inconceivable;
Their boundless oceans of fully purified forms, characteristics,
and radiant auras are inconceivable;
Their oceans of radiant clouds of many different kinds of forms
and characteristics are inconceivable;
Their oceans of flaming radiance emanated by especially superior
jewels are inconceivable;
Their oceans of perfect voices are inconceivable;
Their oceans of manifestations of the three kinds of sovereign mas­
tery by which they train and ripen all beings are inconceivable;67
Their oceans of courageous efforts in training beings which are
never carried out in vain are inconceivable;
Their abiding on the ground of buddhahood is inconceivable;
Their entry into the Tathāgata’s sphere of action is inconceivable;
Their awesome power to afford protection is inconceivable;
Their contemplation of the actions arising from the knowledge of
all buddhas is inconceivable;
Their perfect fulfillment of the powers by which they are invin­
cible is inconceivable;
The meritorious qualities of their fearlessness which no one can
surpass are inconceivable;
Their dwelling in nondiscriminating samādhi is inconceivable;
Their transformations produced by their spiritual superknowl­
edges are inconceivable;
Their pure and masterful wisdom is inconceivable; and
All the indestructible dharmas of buddhahood are inconceivable.
With the assistance of the Buddha’s spiritual powers as well as with
the assistance of the awesome spiritual powers of all tathāgatas, I
will fully explain all dharmas such as these, doing so:
To enable beings to enter the ocean of the Buddha’s wisdom;
To enable all bodhisattvas to become securely established in the
ocean of the Buddha’s meritorious qualities;
To enable all the oceans of worlds to become adorned by all bud­
dhas’ sovereign masteries;
To enable the lineage of the tathāgatas to never be cut off at any
point in the oceans of kalpas;
To enable the true nature of all dharmas to be revealed through­
out all the oceans of worlds;

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
159
To enable the expounding of the Dharma to be adapted to the
ocean of beings’ countless different understandings;
To enable the implementation of skillful means adapted to the
ocean of all beings’ various faculties so that they may be enabled
to bring forth the dharmas of buddhahood;
To enable adaptation to the ocean of all beings’ various aspira­
tions and thereby crush all their mountains of obstacles;
To enable adaptation to the ocean of all beings various mental
actions so as to enable their purifying cultivation of the path to
emancipation; and
To enable all bodhisattvas to become securely established in the
ocean of Samantabhadra’s vows.
At this time, because Samantabhadra Bodhisattva also wished to
enable those in the measureless ocean of the congregation at the
site of enlightenment to be filled with happiness, to enable them to
increase their delight in all dharmas, to enable them to bring forth
a vast ocean of genuine resolute faith, to enable them to purify the
universal gateway to the body of the treasury of the Dharma realm,
to enable them to become securely established in the ocean of
Samantabhadra’s vows, to enable them to purify the wisdom eye with
which one equally enters all three periods of time, to enable them to
increase the ocean of great wisdom which everywhere illuminates
the treasury of all worlds, to enable their development of the dhāraṇī
powers by which one preserves all wheels of the Dharma, to enable
the complete revealing of the buddhas’ entire spheres of action in all
sites of enlightenment, to enable the expounding of the Dharma gate­
ways of all tathāgatas, and to enable growth in [their understanding
of] the nature of the Dharma realm’s vast and extremely profound
omniscience, he then spoke these verses:
His extremely profound wisdom and ocean of meritorious qualities
appear everywhere throughout the ten directions in countless lands.
In accordance with whatever beings should see,
his light everywhere illuminates and turns the wheel of the Dharma.
The ocean of kṣetras throughout ten directions is inconceivable.
For countless kalpas, the Buddha has purified them
and, for the sake of teaching beings and enabling their ripening,
he appears in all lands.
The Buddha’s sphere of action is extremely deep and inconceivable.
He everywhere reveals it to beings and thus enables them to enter.
As their minds delight in the small and attach to stations of existence,68
they are unable to comprehend what the Buddha has awakened to.

160

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Wherever there are those with pure faith and solid resolve
who are always able to draw near to a good spiritual guide,
all buddhas bestow their powers on them.
These are then enabled to enter the wisdom of the Tathāgata.
Those who have abandoned flattery and deceit, who have pure minds,
who always enjoy being kind and compassionate, are naturally happy,
and are people of deep faith whose aspirations are vast—
Whenever they hear this Dharma, they become filled with joy.
Those who dwell securely on the ground of Samantabhadra’s vows,
who cultivate the pure path of the bodhisattva,
and who contemplate the Dharma realm as like empty space—
These then become able to know the Buddha’s sphere of actions.
These bodhisattvas acquire the benefit of goodness
and witness the power of all the Buddha’s spiritual superknowledges.
None of those who cultivate other paths are able to know them.
Those adopting Samantabhadra’s practices are then able to awaken.
Though the realms of beings are boundlessly vast,
the Tathāgata is protectively mindful of them all.
Turning the wheel of right Dharma, there are none he does not reach.
Such is the power of Vairocana Buddha’s sphere of actions.
All of the kṣetras have entered my very body.
So too have all buddhas who dwell there within them.
You should contemplate all of my pores.
I will now thus reveal to you the Buddha’s sphere of action.
The conduct and vows of Samantabhadra are boundless.
I have already cultivated them and reached their complete fulfillment.
The sphere of vision of the universal eye and the vast body
are the domain of the Buddha’s practice. You should listen attentively.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva-mahāsattva addressed the
great assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, regarding the oceans of worlds, there are ten
matters of which all buddhas of the past, present, and future have
spoken, now speak, and will speak. What then are those ten? They
are as follows:
The causes and conditions necessary for the arising and comple­
tion of the oceans of worlds;
That upon which the oceans of worlds depend for their abiding;
The forms of the oceans of worlds;
The essential nature of the oceans of worlds;
The adornments of the oceans of worlds;

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
161
The purity of the oceans of worlds;
The arising of buddhas in the oceans of worlds;
The kalpas during which the oceans of worlds abide;
The differences in the transformations of oceans of worlds and
kalpas; and
The gateway of the absence of differentiating aspects in the oceans
of worlds.
Sons of the Buddha, generally speaking, the oceans of worlds
involve these ten matters. If one were to undertake an expansive
explanation of them, then their number would equal the number of
atoms in an ocean of worlds. All buddhas of the past, the present,
and the future have spoken about them, now speak about them, and
will speak about them.
Sons of the Buddha, generally speaking, there are ten types of
causes and conditions through which all oceans of worlds have
become established, now become established, and will become
established in the future. What then are those ten? They are:
Because of the spiritual powers of the Tathāgata;
Because the Dharma is such that these matters should occur in
this way;
Because of the actions practiced by all beings;
Because of what is acquired by all bodhisattvas in realizing all-
knowledge;
Because of the roots of goodness jointly accumulated by all beings
and bodhisattvas;
Because of the power of all bodhisattvas’ vows to purify lands;
Because of all bodhisattvas’ complete fulfillment of their irrevers­
ible conduct and vows;
Because of all bodhisattvas’ sovereign mastery in implementing
their pure resolute intentions;69
Because of what flows from all tathāgatas’ roots of goodness as
well as from the sovereign power of all buddhas when they
attain enlightenment; and
Because of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva’s sovereign mastery of the
power of vows.
Sons of the Buddha, this is a general explanation of but ten kinds of
causes and conditions. If one were to undertake an expansive explana­
tion of them, then their number would equal the number of atoms in
an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:

162

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The ocean of boundlessly many kṣetras of which we speak
has been completely purified by Vairocana Buddha.
The Bhagavat’s sphere of action is inconceivable.
So too are his wisdom and power of spiritual superknowledges.
In cultivating the ocean of vows, the bodhisattvas
everywhere adapt to the aspirations of beings’ minds.
Beings’ various mental practices are boundlessly vast.
The bodhisattvas’ lands are everywhere in the ten directions.
In their progression toward all-knowledge, the bodhisattvas
diligently cultivate the many different miraculous spiritual powers70
which everywhere come forth from their measureless oceans of vows
by which they bring all the vast kṣetras to perfection.
Their cultivation of the ocean of practices is boundless.
Their penetration of Buddha’s sphere of actions is also measureless.
In order to purify the lands of the ten directions,
they pass through each and every land for countless kalpas.
Beings are confused and muddled by the afflictions,
hence their discriminations and inclinations are not of a single sort.
The karma they create by following their thoughts is inconceivable.
All the oceans of all kṣetras are established by this.
The sons of the Buddha’s oceans of kṣetras are a treasury of adornment
composed of their radiant jewels of immaculate purity.
This arises from the mind of vast resolute faith.
Wherever they dwell in the ten directions, they are all like this.
The bodhisattvas able to cultivate the conduct of Samantabhadra
roam throughout the destinies within the atoms of the Dharma realm.
Within all those atoms, there appear countless kṣetras
that are as pure and as vast as empty space.
In realms as extensive as space, they manifest their spiritual powers
and all go to the sites of enlightenment where the buddhas dwell.
Sitting atop their lotus thrones, revealing their many marks,
each and every one of their bodies contains all kṣetras.
In but a single mind-moment, they appear throughout the three times
and establish all the oceans of kṣetras.
Using skillful means, the Buddha enters them all.
These are what Vairocana has purified.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, throughout every one of the oceans of worlds,
the bases on which they abide are as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds. For example:

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
163
Some abide in reliance on all sorts of adornments;
Some abide in reliance on empty space;
Some abide in reliance on the light of all sorts of jewels;
Some abide in reliance on the light of all buddhas;
Some abide in reliance on light the color of all sorts of jewels;
Some abide in reliance on the voices of all buddhas;
Some abide in reliance on a vajra-wielder in the form of an
immensely powerful asura born from illusion-like karma;
Some abide in reliance on the body of any of the lords of the world;
Some abide in reliance on the bodies of all the bodhisattvas; and
Some abide in reliance on any of the different oceans of adorn­
ment produced from the vows of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva.
Sons of the Buddha, the oceans of worlds have bases such as these
on which they abide that are as numerous as the atoms in an ocean
of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
All the lands everywhere filling
the realms of space throughout the ten directions,
with the assistance of the Tathāgata’s spiritual powers,
appear directly before one in place after place so all can see them.
In some cases, there exist all sorts of different lands,
none of which are not made of immaculate jewels.
The most especially marvelous pristine maṇi jewels
emanate blazing radiance which everywhere manifests oceans of light.
In some cases, there exist pure and radiant kṣetras
which dwell in reliance on the realms of empty space.
In some cases, they reside in an ocean of maṇi jewels.
Then again, there are those securely abiding in a treasury of light.
The Tathāgata dwells within this congregation as vast as an ocean,
expounding, turning the Dharma wheel, always with wondrous skill.
The sphere of action of the buddhas is boundlessly vast.
When beings witness this, their minds are filled with joyous delight.
There are those where maṇi jewels produce their adornments which
form flower-shaped lamps widely spreading their illumination
in clouds of fragrant flaming light, blazing with colored radiance.
These are covered by a suspended shining net of marvelous jewels.
In some cases, there are boundless kṣetras
dwelling in a deep and immense ocean of lotus flowers

164

The Flower Adornment Sutra
which are vast, pure, and unique among the worlds
because they are adorned with the sublime goodness of all buddhas.
In some cases, there are oceans of kṣetras swirling like wheels
which are established by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers.
Congregations of bodhisattvas reside everywhere within them
in which one always sees endless arrays of vast treasures.
In some cases, they abide in the hand of a vajra-wielding spirit.
Then again, sometimes they abide in the body of a celestial lord.
Vairocana Buddha, the unexcelled supreme honored one,
always turns the wheel of Dharma in these places.
In some cases, they abide, perfectly level, in a tree of jewels.
Or, again, in the same way within a cloud of fragrant flaming light.
In some cases they exist in dependence on an immense body of water
or else abide on an ocean of solid vajra.
In some cases, they abide in dependence upon a vajra banner.
Sometimes, they exist within an ocean of flowers.
With vast spiritual superknowledges, none of which are not pervasive,
Vairocana Buddha is able to produce appearances such as these.
Some long, some short, these exist in countless varieties.
Those with ring-like appearances are also not of merely a single type.
Such treasuries of sublime adornment differ from those in the world,
yet, through purity in cultivation, one then becomes able to see them.
Of the many different types such as these, each of which differ,
all abide in reliance on an ocean of vows.
In some instances there are lands forever residing in space
in which buddhas everywhere fill them like clouds.
In some cases, they dwell hanging upside down in space.
Sometimes they exist for a time and sometimes they do not remain.
In some cases, there are lands that are extremely pure
which dwell within a bodhisattva’s jeweled crown.
The great spiritual powers of the buddhas of the ten directions
are all seen within these
and the voices of the buddhas everywhere fill them all.
These are all transformations brought about by the power of karma.
In some cases, these lands are everywhere in the Dharma realm,
pure, immaculate, arising from the mind,
like reflections, like conjurations, boundlessly vast,
and, as in the net of Indra, each different from the other.
They sometimes appear as treasuries of many different adornments
which are established as residing in space.

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
165
The spheres of objective experience born of karma are inconceivable.
The buddha’s powers reveal them and enable everyone to see them.
Within the atoms of each and every land,
the buddha kṣetras appear in every mind-moment
in countless numbers equal to the number of all beings.
The deeds done by Samantabhadra are always just like this.
Because he wishes to enable the maturation of beings,
he cultivates his practices here throughout an ocean of kalpas.
Of his vast spiritual transformations, none are not manifested,
for, within the Dharma realm, they are all pervasively present.
In each and every atom of the lands of the Dharma realm,
all the great oceans of kṣetras reside there within them.
Clouds of buddhas equally cover them all
and, in every place, completely fill them.
Just as they freely function even within a single atom,
so too, within every atom, this is also just so.
All buddhas’ and bodhisattvas’ great spiritual superknowledges,
Vairocana Buddha is able to show them all.
All of the vast kṣetras
are like reflections, like conjurations, and like flames.
Nowhere in the ten directions can one see where they came from,
nor is there any place from which they come or to which they go.
Their destruction and creation recur in cycles
and never in all of space do they pause for even a moment.
None of these do not come forth from pure vows
and they are sustained by the vast power of karma.
Then Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great assem­
bly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, the oceans of worlds exist in many different
sorts of shapes and appearances. For example, some are spherical,
some are rectangular, and some are neither spherical nor rectan­
gular. There are countless differences. Some resemble the shape
of a whirlpool, some resemble the shape of a flaming mountain,
some are shaped like a tree, some are shaped like a flower, some are
shaped like a palace, some are shaped like living beings, and some
are shaped like a buddha. There are different forms such as these as
numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:

166

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The oceans of lands have all kinds of differences, including
all types of adornments and all kinds of ways in which they abide.
Their extraordinary shapes, all beautiful, pervade the ten directions.
You should all join in contemplating them.
In appearance, some are spherical and some are rectangular.
Yet others are triangular, and so on, or even octagonal.
Some are shaped like maṇi jewel spheres or like lotuses, and so forth.
All of them are caused to be different because of karma.
In some cases, they are adorned with pure flaming radiance,
real gold inlay, and many other such extraordinarily fine aspects.
Where the gates and doors readily open without being blocked,
this is due to broadly beneficial karma and pure intentions.
Oceans of kṣetras contain a boundless treasury of differences
like those in the clouds spread out across the sky.
Jewel wheels are spread across the ground as marvelous adornments
in which the buddhas’ light shines forth with dazzling illumination.
The discriminations made by the minds in all lands
are illuminated and revealed by many different kinds of light.
Throughout such oceans of kṣetras as these, the Buddha
displays the power of his spiritual superknowledges in each of them.
Some of these are defiled, whereas others are pure.
The experience of sufferings and enjoyment of pleasures differ in each.
This is due to an inconceivable ocean of karma.
All dharmas of cyclic existence are always this way.
There are an inconceivable number of kṣetras even in a single pore.
The different bases for their abiding are as numerous as atoms.71
In each of them, there dwells a universally illuminating bhagavat,
abiding amidst a congregation, proclaiming the wondrous Dharma.
Even within a single atom, there are large and small kṣetras
existing in all sorts of different ways as numerous as atoms.
Level, towering, or low-lying—the circumstances differ in each case.
The Buddha goes to all of them and turns the wheel of the Dharma.
The kṣetras revealed within all of these atoms
all exist by the power of original vows and spiritual superknowledges.
In accordance with many different distinctions in mental inclinations,
he is able to do this in all of them throughout empty space.
In all of the atoms contained within all lands—
the Buddha enters into every one of those atoms
and everywhere produces spiritual transformations for beings.
The Dharma of Vairocana Buddha is of this very sort.

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
167
Samantabhadra Bodhisattva then again addressed the great assem­
bly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, one should realize that the oceans of worlds are
composed of many different substances. For example:
Some are composed of adornments made of all kinds of jewels;
Some are composed of all kinds of adornments made from one
type of jewel;
Some are composed entirely from the radiance emanated by all
kinds of jewels;
Some are composed of all kinds of different colored lights;
Some are composed of light emanated from all kinds of adorn­
ments;
Some are composed of indestructible vajra;
Some are composed of sustenance from the Buddha’s powers;
Some are composed of aspects of marvelous jewels;
Some are composed of the Buddha’s spiritual transformations;
Some are composed of spheres made of solar maṇi jewels;
Some are composed of the most minute jewels;
Some are composed of the flaming radiance emanated by all
kinds of jewels;
Some are composed of many different types of incense;
Some are composed of floral crowns made of all kinds of jewels;
Some are composed of reflected images emanated by all kinds of
jewels;
Some are composed of manifestations produced by all kinds of
adornments;
Some are composed of spheres of objective experience manifested
everywhere by a single thought of the mind;
Some are composed of jewels made into the shape of a bodhisat­
tva;
Some are composed of the stamens of flowers made of jewels; and
Some are composed of the voice of the Buddha.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
In some cases there are oceans of kṣetras
composed of combinations of marvelous jewels
which are indestructibly solid
and which exist on lotus flowers made of jewels.
In some cases, they are [composed of] pure light
which produces an unknowable [number]

168

The Flower Adornment Sutra
of all kinds of radiant adornments.
These abide in the midst of empty space.
In some cases, pure light is what constitutes their substance
even as they also exist in dependence on light.
Clouds of light create adornments
where the bodhisattvas travel together to dwell.72
In some cases, there are oceans of kṣetras
produced by the power of vows
that exist like reflected images
which cannot be apprehended through verbal descriptions.73
Some of them are composed of maṇi jewels
everywhere emanating radiance from their solar core.
Their grounds are adorned with wheels of pearls
and they are full of bodhisattvas.
There are kṣetras composed of the flaming radiance of jewels
which are covered by clouds of flaming light.
Shining with the extraordinarily marvelous glow of many jewels,
these are all encountered because of one’s karma.
In some cases they are born from the marvelous marks
and have the many characteristics adorning their grounds.
These may be like crowns which everyone wears or holds.74
These all arise from transformations produced by the Buddha.
In some cases, they are produced by an ocean of minds
and exist in conformity with what those minds understand.
Like mere conjurations, they have no location.
All of them are produced by discriminations.
Some arise from the light of buddhas
and have the radiance of maṇi jewels as their substance.
All buddhas appear within them
and each brings forth the power of his spiritual superknowledges.
In some cases, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva
transformationally manifests oceans of kṣetras
which are adorned by the power of his vows.
They are all extraordinarily marvelous.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, one should realize that the oceans of worlds
have many different types of adornments. For example:
In some cases, their adornments consist of supremely marvelous
clouds emanated from all sorts of other adornments;

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
169
In some cases, their adornments consist of proclamations of the
meritorious qualities of all bodhisattvas;
In some cases, their adornments consist of explanations of the
karmic retributions of all beings;
In some cases, their adornments consist of the revelation of all
bodhisattvas’ oceans of vows;
In some cases, their adornments consist of displays of reflected
images of all buddhas of the three periods of time;
In some cases, their adornments consist of showing in a single
moment the spheres of experience associated with limitless kal­
pas of the spiritual superknowledges;75
In some cases, their adornments consist of revealing the body of
all buddhas;76
In some cases, their adornments consist of manifesting clouds of
all sorts of jewels and incense;
In some cases, their adornments consist of revealing the dazzling
illumination in all sites of enlightenment produced by the radi­
ance of all sorts of precious and marvelous things; and
In some cases, their adornments consist of revealing all the con­
duct and vows of Samantabhadra.
Such varieties of adornment are as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
Such vast oceans of kṣetras are boundless.
All of them are created from pure karmic deeds.
With every sort of adornment and every sort of basis for abiding,
they everywhere fill up all the ten directions.
Clouds of flaming jewel light with boundless forms and appearances
create vast adornments that are not of but a single sort.
Always appearing in the oceans of kṣetras of the ten directions,
They everywhere emanate sublime voices and thus teach the Dharma.
The bodhisattvas’ boundless oceans of meritorious qualities
are adorned by their many different types of great vows.
Even as, in this land, they simultaneously emanate sublime voices,
they everywhere shake the web of kṣetras of the ten directions.
The ocean of beings’ karma is measurelessly vast.
As befits the retributions they elicit, each circumstance differs.
From within the adornments present in all places,
because of all buddhas, they are all able to expound on these matters.

170

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The spiritual superknowledges of all tathāgatas of the three times
appear everywhere throughout the oceans of kṣetras.
In each and every phenomenon, all buddhas appear.
You should contemplate such adornment and purification as this.
All lands everywhere in the ten directions
throughout the kalpas of the past, future, and present
and all the great adornments within them—
Every one of these are all seen within each kṣetra.
In all phenomena, there are countless buddhas
equal in number to the beings everywhere in the world.
In order to train them, they bring forth spiritual superknowledges
and use these to adorn the oceans of kṣetras.
All of these adornments pour forth wondrous clouds,
such as all sorts of flower clouds and clouds of fragrant flaming light,
Clouds of maṇi jewels are always appearing.
The oceans of kṣetras take these as their adornments.
In all places in the ten directions where they achieve enlightenment,
the many different sorts of adornments are all fully present.
Their flowing light spreads out afar like varicolored clouds.
Even within this ocean of kṣetras, everyone is enabled to see them.
For kalpas equal to the number of beings, Sons of the Buddha
diligently cultivate the vows and conduct of Samantabhadra,
thereby adorning all the boundlessly many lands.
Within all places, all of this is revealed.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, one should realize that the oceans of worlds
have oceans of skillful means for achieving purity77 as numerous as
the atoms in an ocean of worlds. For example, bodhisattvas [achieve
purity]:
By drawing near to all good spiritual guides, thereby developing
the same roots of goodness;
By increasing their vast clouds of meritorious qualities until they
pervade the Dharma realm;
By purifying and broadening all of the supreme liberations;
By deeply contemplating the spheres of experience of all bodhisat­
tvas and then becoming securely established in them;
By cultivating all the pāramitās to the point where they are all per­
fectly fulfilled;
By deeply contemplating all the bodhisattva grounds and then
entering and dwelling in them;

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
171
By bringing forth the ocean of all pure vows;
By cultivating all the practices leading to emancipation;
By entering the ocean of all adornments; and
By perfecting the power of the skillful means for achieving purity.
[Skillful means for achieving purity] such as these are as numerous
as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The adornments in all the oceans of kṣetras
are born from the power of countless skillful means and vows.
The perpetual dazzling radiance of all the oceans of kṣetras
comes forth from the power of measureless pure karma.
By having for a long time drawn close to good spiritual guides
and thus cultivated good actions together, all of which are pure,
vast kindness and compassion extend everywhere to all beings.
By this means, they adorn all the oceans of kṣetras.
Wherever the buddhas dwell, they undertake purifying cultivation
of all the Dharma gateways, the samādhis, and so forth, including
the grounds of the dhyāna absorptions, liberations, and skillful means.
By this they produce all the oceans of kṣetras.
Through generating measureless resolute understanding,
being able to understand in the same way as a tathāgata, no differently,
and by having cultivated an ocean of expedients leading to patience,
they are therefore able to purify limitless kṣetras.
To benefit beings, they cultivate supreme practices,
and always strive to increase their vast merit
which spreads like a cloud and becomes equal to all of space.
So it is that all the oceans of kṣetras are completely perfected.
The perfections are so measureless as to equal the atoms in a kṣetra.
Having cultivated them all, they enable their complete fulfillment.
The pāramitā of vows is endless.
The oceans of pure kṣetras all come forth from this.
They purely cultivate all the peerless dharmas
and bring forth boundless practices for reaching emancipation.
They use many different skillful means to teach the many beings
and in this way adorn the oceans of lands.
They cultivate the grounds of skillful means and adornment,
enter the ocean of Dharma gates to the Buddha’s meritorious qualities,
and everywhere enable beings to dry up the source of their sufferings.
Thus they bring about the perfection of vast pure kṣetras.

172

The Flower Adornment Sutra
With an incomparably vast ocean of powers,
they everywhere enable beings to plant roots of goodness.
By making offerings to all tathāgatas,
boundless lands are thus all purified.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, one should realize that all the oceans of worlds
have differences in the way that buddhas manifest that are as
numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. For example:
In some cases, they appear in a small body;
In some cases, they appear in a large body;
In some cases they appear with a short life span;
In some cases, they appear with a long life span;
In some cases, they only purify a single buddha land;
In some cases, they purify countless buddha lands;
In some cases, they manifest the Dharma wheel’s teaching of a
single vehicle;
In some cases, they manifest the Dharma wheel’s teaching of an
inconceivable number of vehicles;
In some cases, they manifest as training only a small number of
beings; and
In some cases, they manifest as training boundlessly many beings.
[Differences] such as these are as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The buddhas use many different sorts of skillful means
in the way they come forth and appear in all the oceans of kṣetras.
In all cases, they adapt to beings’ mental dispositions.
This is a function of the Tathāgata’s powers of skillful means.
The Dharma body of the buddhas is inconceivable:
Formless, shapeless, and devoid even of any reflected images.
Still, they can manifest many appearances for the sake of beings,
adapting to their mental dispositions, thus enabling them all to see.
In some cases, they appear before beings as having a short life span.
In some cases, they appear with a life span of countless kalpas.
The Dharma body appears before them throughout the ten directions,
adapting to what is fitting in its manifestations within the world.

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
173
In some cases, they purify inconceivably many
oceans of kṣetras throughout the ten directions.
In some cases, they purify only one land,
manifesting in one of them and not in any others.
In some cases, adapting to beings’ dispositions,
they manifest inconceivably many different types of vehicles.
In some cases, they may proclaim only the One Vehicle’s Dharma,
thus revealing measurelessly many within a single expedient means.
In some cases, they attain right enlightenment on their own78
and then enable but a few beings to dwell on the path.
In some cases, they are able in but a single mind-moment
to awaken a numberless multitude of the many confused beings.
In some cases, they emanate conjured clouds from their pores
and thereby manifest countlessly and boundlessly many buddhas.
Thus everyone in the world is able to directly see
the many different skillful means they use to liberate beings.
In some cases, their voices everywhere pervade all places,
adapt to their dispositions, and then teach the Dharma.
Thus, throughout inconceivably many great kalpas,
they train oceans of countlessly many beings.
In some cases, there are countless adorned lands
in which they sit majestically in the midst of pure congregations
even as buddhas spread forth like clouds among them,
having no oceans of kṣetras in the ten directions they do not fill.
The skillful means of the buddhas are inconceivable.
Adapting to beings’ minds, they appear before them all.
They dwell everywhere in many different types of adorned kṣetras
and are pervasively present throughout all lands.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, one should realize that the oceans of worlds
have as many durations of existence in kalpas as there are atoms in
an ocean of worlds. For example:79
In some cases, they exist for an asaṃkhyeya kalpa;
In some cases, they exist for a measureless kalpa;
In some cases, they exist for a boundless kalpa;
In some cases, they exist for an incomparable kalpa;
In some cases, they exist for an innumerable kalpa;
In some cases, they exist for an indescribable kalpa;
In some cases, they exist for an inconceivable kalpa;

174

The Flower Adornment Sutra
In some cases, they exist for an immeasurable kalpa; and
In some cases, they exist for an ineffable kalpa.
[Durations of existence] such as these are as numerous as the atoms
in an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
In the oceans of worlds, they have many different kalpa durations
during which they are adorned through vast skillful means.
By contemplating the lands of the ten directions,
one clearly understands all the differences in numerical durations.
As I observe the oceans of worlds throughout the ten directions, I see
their countless different kalpa durations are as numerous as beings.
In some cases long, in some cases short, in some cases boundless.
With the voice of the Buddha, I now describe them.
As I observe the oceans of kṣetras throughout the ten directions,
I see some endure for kalpas as numerous as atoms in a single land,
some endure for one kalpa, and some endure for countlessly many.
It is due to many different kinds of vows that they are each different.
Some of them are entirely pure, some are entirely defiled,
and yet others possess a mixture of both defilement and purity.
Oceans of vows establish many different variations.
Their abiding corresponds to the thoughts in the minds of beings.
Having cultivated for past kalpas equal to the atoms in a kṣetra,
they acquire vast and pure oceans of worlds.
The realms of the buddhas are replete in adornments
and they dwell forever throughout boundlessly vast kalpas.
There are those known as Radiance of the Many Sorts of Jewels.
Others are known as Treasury of Equal Sounds or Flaming Light Eyes,
Light of Defilement Transcendence, or Worthy Kalpa.
These pure kalpas include them all.
There are pure kalpas in which a single buddha appears.
In some cases, in a single kalpa, there are countless such appearances.
With endless skillful means and the power of great vows,
they enter into all the many different kinds of kalpas.
In some cases, countless kalpas are subsumed within a single kalpa.
Or, then again, a single kalpa may be subsumed within many kalpas.
All the oceans of kalpas involve many different variations
which are all clearly apparent among the lands of the ten directions.

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
175
In some cases, all the adorning phenomena present in all kalpas
are all apparent and visible within but a single kalpa.
And in some cases, the adornments in but a single kalpa
everywhere enter all the boundlessly many kalpas.
From their first single mind-moment until they finally become a kalpa,
they all rely on the thoughts of beings as the bases for their arising.
All the oceans of kṣetras and the boundless kalpas
are all purified through a single skillful means.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, one should realize that the oceans of worlds
have differences in kalpa transformations which are as numerous
as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. For example:
Because the Dharma is this way, the oceans of worlds undergo
countless kalpa transformations affecting their formation and
destruction;
Because defiled beings come to dwell in them, oceans of worlds
undergo kalpa transformations producing defilement;
Because beings who cultivate vast merit come to dwell in them,
oceans of worlds undergo kalpa transformations producing the
purification of defilement;
Because bodhisattvas possessed of resolute faith come to dwell in
them, oceans of worlds undergo kalpa transformations produc­
ing the purification of defilement;
Because countless beings resolve to attain bodhi, oceans of worlds
undergo kalpa transformations producing complete purifica­
tion;
Because bodhisattvas individually roam to their worlds, oceans
of worlds undergo kalpa transformations producing boundless
adornment;
Because bodhisattvas from all worlds of the ten directions gather
like clouds, oceans of worlds undergo kalpa transformations
producing countless great adornments;
Because the buddhas, the bhagavats, enter nirvāṇa, the oceans of
worlds undergo kalpa transformations producing the cessation
of their adornments;80
Because the buddhas appear in the world, the oceans of worlds
undergo kalpa transformations producing vast purification;
and
Because of transformations arising from the Tathāgata’s spiritual
superknowledges, the oceans of worlds undergo kalpa transfor­
mations producing pervasive purification.

176

The Flower Adornment Sutra
[Kalpa transformations] such as these are as numerous as the atoms
in an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
All lands are born
in accordance with the power of karma.
You should all contemplate
the characteristics of transformation such as these.
All defiled beings’
entanglement in karma and afflictions is fearsome.
Their minds cause the oceans of kṣetras
to all become defiled.
In a case where they possess pure minds
and cultivate all sorts of meritorious actions,
their minds cause the oceans of kṣetras
to progress from defilement toward purity.81
When bodhisattvas possessed of resolute faith
are born into those kalpas,
in accordance with whatever exists in their own minds,
they will perceive either defilement or purity.
Where countless beings
have all resolved to attain bodhi,
their minds cause the ocean of kṣetras to be constantly pure
during the period of the kalpas’ abiding.82
When countless koṭīs of bodhisattvas
go forth throughout the ten directions
although the adornments they produce are no different,
during those kalpas, there are differences in what is perceived.
Even within each and every atom,
there are buddha kṣetras as numerous as atoms.
Where the bodhisattvas gather like clouds,
those lands are all pure.
Wherever bhagavats enter nirvāṇa,
the adornments of those lands then perish.
When there are no beings who can serve as Dharma vessels,
the world becomes defiled.
If a buddha appears in the world,
everything becomes marvelously fine.
In accordance with the purity of the minds within it,
its adornments may all become perfectly complete.

Chapter 4 — The Formation of the Worlds
177
Due to the power of the buddhas’ spiritual superknowledges,
whatever then appears is inconceivable.
At this time, the oceans of kṣetras
all become completely pure.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, one should realize that the oceans of worlds
have ways in which they do not differ that are as numerous as the
atoms in an ocean of worlds. For example:
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are ways they do not
differ that are as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds;
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in
the ways in which buddhas manifest their awesome powers;
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in all
the sites of enlightenment throughout the ten directions of the
Dharma realm;
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in
the congregations at all tathāgatas’ sites of enlightenment;
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in
the way the light of all buddhas pervades the Dharma realm;
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in all
buddhas’ spiritual transformations and titles;83
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in
the way the voices of all buddhas pervade the oceans of worlds
for the duration of boundless kalpas;
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in
the skillful means [used when turning] the Dharma wheel;
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there are no differences in
the way all oceans of worlds enter a single atom; and
In every one of the oceans of worlds, there is no difference in the
way that the sphere of action of all the buddhas, the bhagavats,
of the three periods of time appears in every atom.
Sons of the Buddha, generally speaking, these are the ways in which
the oceans of worlds have no differences. If one were to undertake
an expansive discussion of this matter, the ways in which there are
no differences would be as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of
worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:

178

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Within a single atom, there are many oceans of kṣetras.
Although their locations are different, they are all adorned.
In this way, the measureless enters into whatever is singular,
yet every separate entity remains free of any intermixing or overlap.
In every atom, there are inconceivably many buddhas.
Adapting to beings’ minds, they appear everywhere before them.
Of all oceans of kṣetras, there are none they do not entirely pervade.
In all such skillful means as these, there are no differences.
In every atom, all the kings of trees
have many different adornments hanging down.
They all equally appear in all lands throughout the ten directions.
In all matters such as these, there are no differences.
In every atom are congregations as numerous as atoms,
all of which join in surrounding the lords among all men
who, transcending them all, pervade the world,
and yet this still occurs with no crowding, intermixing, or disarray.
In every atom, there are countless light rays
that everywhere pervade all lands of the ten directions.
They all reveal the bodhi practices of all buddhas
which, even throughout all the oceans of kṣetras, do not differ.
In every atom, there are countless bodies
transformationally conjured, pervading everywhere like clouds.
The Buddha’s use of spiritual power to lead the many types of beings
does not differ even in all the lands throughout the ten directions.
Even in every atom, he teaches the many types of dharmas.
His Dharma is pure, as when the wheel is turned.
The various skillful means and gateways of sovereign mastery,
in the ways these are all expounded, there are no differences.
From in a single atom, there everywhere emanates all buddhas’ voices
filling all those beings who are vessels fit for preserving the Dharma.
They pervade and endure in the oceans of kṣetras for endless kalpas.
In their voices such as these, there are also no differences.
Of the countless marvelous adornments in the oceans of kṣetras,
there are none that do not all enter even into a single atom.
Such powers of the buddhas’ spiritual superknowledges as these
all arise entirely from the nature of karma.
In every atom, the buddhas of the three periods of time,
adapting to the inclinations of beings, allow them all to see.
Their essential nature has neither any coming nor any going.
It is through their power of vows that they pervade all worlds.
The End of Chapter Four

Chapter 5
The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds84
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, this Flower Treasury85 Adornment Ocean of
Worlds was purified by Vairocana Tathāgata in the past when he
cultivated the bodhisattva practices for kalpas as numerous as the
atoms in an ocean of worlds, drew near in every kalpa to buddhas as
numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds, and, in the presence
of each of those buddhas, purely cultivated great vows as numerous
as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
Sons of the Buddha, this Flower Treasury Adornment Ocean of
Worlds is supported by wind spheres as numerous as the atoms in
Mount Sumeru:
Its lowest wind sphere which is known as Level Dwelling, is able
to support all the flaming jewel light adornments above it;
The next higher wind sphere is known as Producing All Sorts of
Jewel Adornments. It is able to support the banners of sovereign
pure-light radiance maṇi jewels above it;
The next higher wind sphere is known as Jewel of Awesome
Virtue. It is able to support all the jeweled chimes above it;
The next higher wind sphere is known as Equal Flaming Radiance.
It is able to support the spheres of sunlight-like sovereign maṇi
jewels above it;
The next higher wind sphere is known as Various Pervasive
Adornments. It is able to support the radiant wheel flowers
above it;
The next higher wind sphere is known as Universal Purity. It
is able to support all the floral flaming-radiance lion thrones
above it;
The next higher wind sphere is known as Sound Resounding in
the Ten Directions. It is able to support all the sovereign pearl
banners above it;
The next higher wind sphere is known as Radiance of All Jewels.
It is able to support all the sovereign maṇi jewel tree blossoms
above it;

180

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The next higher wind sphere is known as Rapid Universal
Support. It is able to support all the Sumeru clouds of fragrant
maṇi jewel above it; and
The next higher wind sphere is known as Various Wandering
Palaces. It is able to support all the clouds of jewel-colored
incense halls86 above it.
Sons of the Buddha, of all those wind spheres as numerous as
the atoms in Mount Sumeru, the highest one is called Treasury
of Extraordinary Awesome Radiance. It is able to support the
Fragrant Ocean Adorned with Pervasively Radiant Maṇi Jewels.
On this fragrant ocean, there is an immense lotus flower known as
Fragrant Banner of Various Radiant Stamens. The Flower Treasury
Adornment Ocean of Worlds rests in the middle of it. Its terrain
is equally level in all four directions and it is pure, solid, and sur­
rounded all around by the Vajra Ring Mountains. Its earth, oceans,
and many sorts of trees are all distinctive.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
In the past, in all the realms of existence, the Bhagavat
cultivated pure deeds together with buddhas as numerous as atoms.
Thus he acquired the radiance of all kinds of precious jewels
and the Flower Treasury Adornment Ocean of Worlds.
As his vast cloud of compassion extended to everyone everywhere,
he sacrificed countless bodies equal in number to the atoms in a kṣetra.
By the power of his cultivation throughout an ocean of past kalpas,
this world has now become free of the defilements.
It emanates great radiance that pervades and abides in space.
Supported by the power of the winds, it is unshakable.
It is everywhere adorned with buddha-treasury maṇi jewels.
The power of the Tathāgata’s vows causes it to be purified.
Flowers with lovely maṇi jewel seed pods are scattered everywhere.
Through the power of past vows, they remain in the sky.
Over an ocean of many different kinds of durable adornments
clouds of light hang down and spread to fill the ten directions.
Within the maṇi jewels, clouds of bodhisattvas
go everywhere in the ten directions, emanating blazing radiance.
Flaming light forms spheres beautified with marvelous flowers that
flow all around the Dharma realm, with no place they do not pervade.
From within all the jewels, there emanates pure light.
Their radiance everywhere illuminates the oceans of beings,

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
181
and completely pervades the lands throughout the ten directions,
enabling all to escape from suffering and then progress toward bodhi.
The number of buddhas within the jewels equals that of beings.
From their pores, they send forth transformation bodies
of Brahma Heaven Lords, Indras, wheel-turning kings, and others,
including those of all types of beings as well as those of buddhas.
Their conjured light rays equally illuminate the entire Dharma realm.
From within the rays of light are proclaimed the names of all buddhas
and the various skillful means they use as, instructing and training,
they everywhere respond to the minds of all beings without exception.
In every atom among all the atoms
in the Flower Treasury World, one sees the Dharma realm.
The light of jewels reveals buddhas assembled like clouds.
Such is the Tathāgata’s sovereign mastery within the kṣetras.
The vast clouds of vows pervade the Dharma realm, where,
throughout all kalpas, they enable the teaching of the many beings.
The practices of Samantabhadra’s ground of wisdom are all perfected.
All of these adornments come forth from these.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, the great ring of mountains surrounding this
Flower Treasury Adornment Ocean of Worlds rests atop a solar
crystal87 king lotus flower. Sandalwood and maṇi jewels form the
body [of the mountains]. Sovereign awesome virtue jewels form
their peaks. Wonderfully fragrant maṇi jewels make up their ring.
They are all composed of vajra that radiates flaming radiance from
within. All sorts of fragrant streams flow between them. Their for­
ests are composed of many kinds of jewels. Marvelous flowers are
in full bloom. Fragrant grasses carpet the ground which is com­
posed of a decorative inlay of radiant jewels. All different types of
fragrant flowers flourish fully in place after place. Maṇi jewels form
nets that are suspended all around and above. There are a multi­
tude of marvelous adornments such as these as numerous as the
atoms in an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The great ocean of worlds is boundless.
Its surrounding ring of jewels is pure and of many different colors.
All of its adornments are utterly marvelous.

182

The Flower Adornment Sutra
This all comes forth from the spiritual powers of the Tathāgata.
Rings of maṇi jewels, rings of marvelous incense,
as well as rings of pearl lamps radiating flaming light—
Many different sorts of marvelous jewels form these adornments
upon which the pure surrounding ring [of mountains] rests.
Solid maṇi jewels form its treasury.
Jambūnada gold forms its beautifying adornments.
Streaming light emanates flaming radiance filling the ten directions.
Within and without, its brilliance penetrates—everything is pure.
It is composed of an aggregation of vajra jewels
which in turn rain down maṇi jewels and marvelous gems.
Those jewels, exquisite and marvelous, not of but a single kind,
emanate pure radiance that everywhere adorns and beautifies.
Fragrant streams divide into rivulets of countless colors.
All kinds of flowers, jewels, and sandalwood incense sprinkle down.
Multitudes of vigorously blooming lotuses appear like flowing robes.
The rare greenery’s burgeoning growth is all rich with fragrance.
Countless jeweled trees everywhere lend their adornment.
Blooming flowers push forth stamens in fiery colors.
Many different types of rare robes lay there among them.
Clouds of light, ever round and full, illuminate the four quarters.
Countlessly and boundlessly many great bodhisattvas,
holding up canopies and burning incense, fill the Dharma realm.
They all send forth all kinds of marvelous voices,
everywhere turning the Tathāgata’s wheel of right Dharma.
There are all kinds of maṇi jewel trees with branches made of jewels.
Every one of their jeweled branches emanates rays of light.
Vairocana Buddha’s pure body
enters each of them, thus enabling everyone to see him.
The body of the Buddha appears in all the adornments,
manifesting in boundless forms and appearances, endless in number,
that all go off to the ten directions, having no place they do not reach.
The beings they teach are also infinitely numerous.
All of these adornments emanate marvelous voices,
proclaiming the Tathāgata’s wheel of original vows.
By the power of the Buddha’s sovereign mastery, all of them are able
to pervade the ocean of all the pure kṣetras of the ten directions.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
183
Sons of the Buddha, in this ocean of worlds, all of the ground within
the great ring of surrounding mountains is composed entirely of
vajra. It is solid, adorned, and indestructible. It is pure, level, and
free of high or low regions. Maṇi jewels form its ring and the many
sorts of jewels form its treasury. It is inlaid with all sorts of maṇi
jewels forming many different images of all types of beings. It is
strewn with jewel sands and scattered with lotus flowers. Fragrant
maṇi jewels are spread about among them. Adornments pervade
every place like clouds. It is interspersed and beautified with all the
adornments found in all buddha lands of the three periods of time.
The marvelous maṇi jewels forming its nets everywhere display all
of the Tathāgata’s spheres of action. They are arrayed there like the
net of Indra.
Sons of the Buddha, the grounds of this ocean of worlds have
adornments such as these which are as numerous as the atoms in
an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
Its grounds are level, utterly pure,
securely established, solid, and indestructible.
The maṇi jewels everywhere forming its adornments
are inlaid with the many kinds of jewels.
Vajra forms its especially pleasing grounds.
Its jeweled wheels and jewel nets are completely adorned.
Lotus Flowers, all in full bloom, are spread across it
and marvelous robes everywhere cover it.
Bodhisattvas’ celestial crowns and jeweled necklaces
are spread across its grounds as adorning finery.
Sandalwood incense and maṇi jewels are scattered all about therein.
They all emanate the sublime radiance of immaculate purity.
Jeweled flowers emanate flaming radiance and emit marvelous light.
Blazing radiance appearing like clouds illuminates everything
and scatters these wondrous flowers and the many types of jewels
which everywhere cover the ground as decorative adornments.
Dense clouds spread forth, filling the ten directions
with vast and endless brilliant radiance.
They extend everywhere to all lands throughout the ten directions
proclaiming the Tathāgata’s ambrosial Dharma nectar.
The vows of all buddhas are all revealed within the maṇi jewels
as they carried them out throughout boundless vast kalpas.

184

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Of all the past practices of those of supreme knowledge,
There are none of them one does not see within these jewels.
All the buddha kṣetras come and enter
all the maṇi jewels there on its grounds.
All those lands also enter
into every atom of all those buddha kṣetras.
In the Flower Treasury World adorned with wondrous jewels,
bodhisattvas roam throughout the ten directions
and expound upon the vast vows of the Great Eminence.
This occurs by the miraculous powers of the site of enlightenment.
The grounds adorned with wondrous maṇi jewels
emanate pure light replete with many beautiful phenomena
that fills up an expanse of the Dharma realm equal to that of space.
The powers of the Buddha naturally manifest in this way.
All who cultivate the vows of Samantabhadra,
those greatly wise ones who enter the Buddha’s sphere of experience,
are able to know within this ocean of kṣetras
all such spiritual transformations as these.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, on the great earth within this ocean of worlds,
there are an ineffable number of fragrant oceans as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra. Every kind of wondrous jewel adorns their
ocean floors. Marvelous fragrant maṇi jewels beautify their shores.
Vairocana sovereign maṇi jewels form their nets. They are filled with
fragrant waters, bright and translucent, the color of the many jew­
els. All kinds of jeweled flowers turn about on the surface of their
waters. Fine sandalwood powder clarifies their waters below. They
send forth the sounds of the Buddha’s voice and emanate rays of
jewel light. Boundlessly many bodhisattvas hold up many different
kinds of canopies and manifest spiritual powers with which all the
adornments found in all worlds appear in them.
Staircases made of ten kinds of precious jewels are arrayed in
rows with balustrades made of the ten jewels arranged all around
them. Blooming luxuriantly on the surface of the waters are
puṇḍarīka88 lotus flowers as numerous as the atoms in four conti­
nents, each of which is adorned with all kinds of jewels. There are
an ineffable number of hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas
of śīla banners made of the ten kinds of jewels, a Ganges’ sands
number of net banners that are hung with all kinds of jeweled
robes and chimes, a Ganges sands’ number of towers adorned with

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
185
jeweled flowers in infinitely varied forms and appearances, hun­
dreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of cities of lotuses made of
the ten kinds of jewels, and groves of trees made of the many kinds
of jewels as numerous as the atoms in four continents. Its nets are
made of maṇi jewels aglow with the flaming light of every kind of
gem. There are varieties of sandalwood incense as numerous as the
Ganges’ sands, maṇi jewels aglow with flaming light that emanate
the sounds of the Buddha’s voice, and an ineffable number of hun­
dreds of thousands of koṭīs of walls decorated with the many kinds
of jewels which everywhere surround the waters and serve as beau­
tifying adornments everywhere.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
On the great earth of this world
are fragrant oceans adorned with maṇi jewels
with pure and marvelous jewels spread across their ocean floors
established on indestructible vajra.
Their shores are made of accumulations of fragrant maṇi jewels.
Spheres of flaming solar-radiance jewels spread forth like clouds.
Lotus flowers and marvelous jewels form garlands
that everywhere serve as adornments of immaculate purity.
Their fragrant waters are clear, still, and imbued with many colors.
Jeweled flowers turn about all over their surface, radiating light.
Voices causing tremors everywhere, heard both far and near,
by the Buddha’s awesome powers, expound the sublime Dharma.
The adornments of the flights of steps consist of many kinds of jewels.
They are also beautified by inlaid maṇi jewels.
Balustrades made entirely of jewels surround them all around.
Curtain nets of lotuses and jewels spread forth like clouds.
Maṇi jewel trees are arrayed in rows.
Flower buds luxuriantly blossom in resplendent radiance.
Many different kinds of music constantly play in turn.
The Buddha’s spiritual powers enable this to be so.
Puṇḍarīka lotus flowers arrayed with various sorts of wondrous jewels
blossom and spread their adornments on the ocean’s fragrant waters.
Their fragrant flaming radiance which never ceases for even a moment
is vast and perfectly full, completely pervading everywhere.
Jeweled banners of radiant pearls constantly blaze brightly.
Marvelous robes drape down as beautifying adornments.

186

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Netting hung with maṇi jewel chimes emanating sounds of Dharma
enable those who hear to progress toward the Buddha’s wisdom.
Marvelous jeweled lotus flowers form city walls
adorned with many-colored maṇi jewels.
Reflected light cast by clouds of pearls spreads to the four quarters.
It is in these ways that the oceans of fragrant waters are adorned.
Walls which wind all about, surrounding everything,
have viewing towers facing each other arrayed along their tops.
Countless light rays constantly blaze forth.
Many different such adornments beautify these pure oceans.
Throughout the distant past, Vairocana Buddha
purified all the many different kinds of oceans of kṣetras
in such vast and boundless ways as this.
All of these arise through the sovereign powers of the Tathāgata.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, every one of these fragrant oceans is fed by
rivers of fragrant waters as numerous as the atoms in four conti­
nents, all of which flow around in a rightward direction. All of
them have banks made of vajra adorned with pure-light maṇi jew­
els always manifesting jewel-colored light clouds of buddhas while
also resounding with the voices of all beings. From all those rivers’
whirlpools emerge all sorts of images of the causal practices culti­
vated by all buddhas.
Maṇi jewels form nets hung with chimes and bells adorned
with the many kinds of gems. All the adornments contained in all
oceans of worlds appear there within them. Clouds of maṇi jewels
cover them. Those clouds everywhere reveal the appearance of the
transformation buddhas of the Flower Treasury World’s Vairocana
Buddha along with images of all buddhas’ feats of spiritual super­
knowledges. They also emanate marvelous voices proclaiming the
names of the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the three periods of time.
Their fragrant waters always send forth clouds of blazing light
emanated by all kinds of jewels. These phenomena continue on
incessantly. An extensive description of them would include for
every one of these rivers’ adornments as numerous as the atoms in
an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
187
Pure fragrant waters fill those great rivers.
Vajra and marvelous jewels form their banks.
Jewel dust forms wheels spread across their grounds.
Their many different beautifying adornments are all rare and fine.
Jeweled stairs arrayed in rows are marvelously adorned.
Balustrades stretch all around, all of them of extraordinary beauty.
Real pearls form treasuries decorated with many kinds of flowers.
Many different sorts of garlands are draped all about.
The fragrant waters radiate jewel light in pristine colors
and constantly pour forth swift currents of maṇi jewels.
The many flowers all sway along with the waves
and all play musical sounds proclaiming the wondrous Dharma.
Their river-bottom sediment is made of finely powdered sandalwood
and all sorts of marvelous jewels join the eddies’ flow.
Mists laden with fragrances spread about within them,
emanating flaming radiance and sending flowing scents everywhere.
The river brings forth all kinds of marvelous jewels,
all of which emanate light in blazing colors.
Their radiance spreads reflections forming daises and thrones
with floral canopies and pearl strands, all entirely complete.
In the sovereign maṇi jewels appear images of the buddhas’ bodies.
Their light everywhere illuminates the kṣetras of the ten directions.
These form wheels that beautify the grounds.
The fragrant waters, shining and clear, are forever full.
Nets made of maṇi jewels, hung with bells of gold,
everywhere cover the fragrant rivers and emanate the Buddha’s voice.
They are thus able to proclaim all the paths to bodhi
as well as the marvelous practices of Samantabhadra.
The jeweled shores’ maṇi jewels of foremost purity
constantly emanate the sound of the Tathāgata’s original vows
as well as the practices of all buddhas throughout the past.
Their sound streams forth everywhere and enables all to see them.
From all the rivers’ eddies,
bodhisattvas constantly stream forth like clouds.
They all go forth into the vast kṣetras
and fill up even the entire Dharma realm.
Pure kings of pearls spread forth like clouds,
stretching above and over all the fragrant rivers.
Those pearls match the look of the sign between the Buddha’s brows
and brilliantly display the reflected images of all buddhas.

188

The Flower Adornment Sutra
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, the areas of ground lying between the rivers of
fragrant waters all have many different kinds of adornment com­
posed of marvelous jewels. Every one of those areas has as many
puṇḍarīka flowers adorned with the many types of jewels as there
are atoms in the four continents. They surround and completely fill
those areas. Each of those areas contains groves of many-jeweled
trees arrayed in rows that are as numerous as the atoms in the four
continents. From every one of those trees, there constantly stream
forth clouds of every kind of adornment in which sovereign maṇi
jewels illuminate the space between them with dazzling light. The
full fragrance of the many different sorts of flowers is everywhere
present. Those trees also emanate wonderful voices speaking of
the great vows cultivated by all tathāgatas in every kalpa. They also
scatter all different kinds of sovereign maṇi jewels that everywhere
cover those grounds, namely: lotus flower sphere sovereign maṇi
jewels, fragrant flaming light cloud sovereign maṇi jewels, variously
adorned sovereign maṇi jewels, sovereign maṇi jewels manifesting
inconceivable adorning colors, sovereign maṇi jewels containing a
treasury of solar-radiance robes, sovereign maṇi jewels everywhere
trailing radiant net clouds throughout the ten directions; sovereign
maṇi jewels showing the spiritual transformations of all buddhas,
and sovereign maṇi jewels showing the ocean of all beings’ karmic
retributions. There are as many phenomena such as these as there
are atoms in an ocean of worlds. Every one of the areas between
those rivers of fragrant waters is replete with adornments such as
these.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
Those grounds are level, extremely pure,
and adorned by both real gold and maṇi jewels.
All kinds of trees standing in rows shade the areas between them.
Their straight trunks hang down flowering branches like clouds.
Their boughs and branchlets are adorned with marvelous jewels.
Flaming light from flowers forms orbs illuminating the four quarters.
Maṇi jewels form fruits that appear like spreading clouds,
enabling all in the ten directions to always directly see them.
Maṇi jewels completely cover all those grounds
that are adorned by the many kinds of flowers and powdered jewels.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
189
There are also palaces made of maṇi jewels,
in all of which are seen the reflected images of beings.
Sovereign maṇi jewels reflecting images of the buddhas
are spread all over those grounds, nowhere not pervasively.
Thus their gloriously bright illumination pervades the ten directions
in which, in each and every atom, one sees the buddhas.
Marvelous jeweled adornments are well arrayed,
interspersed with nets of pearl lamps.
In place after place, there are maṇi jewel spheres,
every one of which displays the Buddha’s spiritual superknowledges.
Adornments made of the many jewels emanate bright rays of light.
Transformation buddhas appear everywhere in those rays.
Each of them travels all about, none of them not pervasively,
and they all use the ten powers to extensively expound the teachings.
Puṇḍarīka flowers adorned with marvelous maṇi jewels
everywhere completely cover all those waters.
Their flowers are of many different sorts, with each not the same.
They all display light rays which never cease their shining.
All the adornments of the three periods of time
appear within all these maṇi jewel fruits.
Their essential nature is unproduced and ungraspable.
These are a result of the Tathāgata’s sovereign powers.
Within all the adornments present in this land,
the vast body of the Tathāgata is shown.
He both does not come and also does not go.
By the power of the Buddha’s past vows, all are enabled to see.
In each and every atom of this land,
all sons of the Buddha cultivate the path.
Each sees the kṣetra he was predicted to inhabit in the future
which is purified in accordance with his own dispositions.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying, “Sons of the Buddha, all the adornments of the
oceans of worlds of the buddhas, the bhagavats, are inconceivable.
Why is this so? Sons of the Buddha, every one of all the realms within
this Flower Treasury Adornment Ocean of Worlds is adorned with
pure qualities as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.”
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the
awesome power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva sur­
veyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
Every place within this ocean of kṣetras
is adorned with many kinds of jewels.

190

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Their flaming light leaps up into space and spreads like clouds.
Their penetrating radiance always completely covers everything.
Those maṇi jewels endlessly stream forth such clouds
in which appear reflected images of the buddhas of the ten directions.
None of their spiritual transformations pause even briefly.
All the bodhisattvas come and assemble there.
All the maṇi jewels emanate the voice of the Buddha.
Their sound is beautifully sublime and inconceivable.
Whatever Vairocana Buddha practiced in the past
is constantly heard and seen within these jewels.
The Bhagavat, his pure light illuminating everywhere,
reveals his reflected images within all the adornments.
His transformational division bodies surrounded by congregations
are everywhere present throughout all the oceans of kṣetras.
All those transformation buddhas are like conjurations.
If one sought the place from which they came, one could never find it.
By the awesome spiritual power of the Buddha’s sphere of action,
they manifest in this way even within every kṣetra.
The phenomena due to the Tathāgata’s miraculous spiritual powers
are all present everywhere throughout the lands of the ten directions.
Because of the pure adornments found in these oceans of kṣetras,
they are all able to be seen within these jewels.
These transformations throughout the ten directions
are all like images in a mirror.
It is solely due to the power of the Tathāgata’s past practice
of the spiritual superknowledges and vows that they are all created.
Wherever someone is able to cultivate Samantabhadra’s practices
and enter into the bodhisattva’s ocean of supreme wisdom,
he becomes able then to enter even into every atom,
manifesting his body everywhere and purifying many kṣetras.
Having drawn near to all tathāgatas
for inconceivably many koṭīs of great kalpas,
in but a single kṣaṇa, such a person is then able to manifest
everything they have practiced just as they have practiced them.
The lands of all buddhas are like empty space,
incomparable, unproduced, and signless.
To benefit beings, they everywhere purify them
and dwell within them due to the power of their original vows.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
191
Sons of the Buddha, what sorts of worlds exist herein? I shall now
describe them. Sons of the Buddha, within these fragrant oceans as
numerous as the atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras,
there are established world systems as numerous as the atoms in
an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. Every one of those world
systems in turn contains worlds as numerous as the atoms in an
ineffable number of buddha kṣetras.
Sons of the Buddha, within each of the world systems within the
ocean of worlds, each world has its own basis of existence, each has
its own form, each has its own essential nature, each has its own
region, each has its own modes of entry, each has its own adorn­
ments, each has its own specific aspects, each has its own arrange­
ment, each has its own ways in which it does not differ, and each
has its own empowerments.
Sons of the Buddha, among these world systems, some take a
great ocean of lotus flowers as the basis of their existence, some
take an infinitely colored ocean of jeweled flowers as the basis of
their existence, some take an ocean of all sorts of pearl treasur­
ies and jewel necklaces as the basis of their existence, some take a
fragrant ocean as the basis of their existence, some take an ocean
of all kinds of flowers as the basis of their existence, some take an
ocean of maṇi jewel nets as the basis of their existence, some take an
ocean of whirlpool light as the basis of their existence, some take
an ocean of bodhisattva crowns adorned with jewels as the basis of
their existence, some take an ocean of all different kinds of beings’
bodies as the basis of their existence, and some take an ocean of sov­
ereign maṇi jewels emanating the voices of all buddhas as the basis
of their existence. If one were to pursue an expansive explanation
of [bases for existence] such as these, they would be as numerous as
the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
Sons of the Buddha, among all of those world systems, some
take the form of a Mount Sumeru, some take the form of a river,
some take the form of a vortex, some take the form of a whirlpool,
some take the form of a wheel, some take the form of sacrificial
platforms,89 some take the form of forest groves, some take the form
of towers, some take the form of a mountain banner, some take the
form of a common polygon, some take the form of a womb, some
take the form of a lotus flower, some take the form of a khārīka grain
basket,90 some take the form of a being’s body, some take the form
of a cloud, some take the form of all buddhas’ major marks or sec­
ondary characteristics, some take the form of a sphere of light, some
take the form of many different kinds of nets made of jewels, some

192

The Flower Adornment Sutra
take the form of all sorts of palace doors, and some take the form of
all kinds of adornments. If one were to pursue an extensive expla­
nation of [all the shapes of world systems] such as these, they would
be as numerous as the atoms in an ocean of worlds.
Sons of the Buddha, among all of those world systems, some take
clouds of maṇi jewels throughout the ten directions as their sub­
stance, some take many colors of flaming light as their substance,
some take all kinds of light as their substance, some take the fragrant
flaming light of jewels as their substance, some take tāla tree91 flow­
ers adorned with all kinds of jewels as their substance, some take
reflections of bodhisattva images as their substance, some take the
light of buddhas as their substance, some take a buddha’s physical
features as their substance, some take the radiance of a single jewel
as their substance, some take the radiance of many jewels as their
substance, some take the sounds of the ocean of all beings’ merit
as their substance, some take the sounds of the ocean of all beings’
karma as their substance, some take the pure sound of all buddhas’
spheres of action as their substance, some take the sound of the
ocean of all bodhisattvas’ great vows as their substance, some take
the sound of all buddhas’ skillful means as their substance, some
take the sounds of the creation and destruction of the adornments
of all kṣetras as their substance, some take the sounds of bound­
lessly many buddhas as their substance, some take the sounds of
all buddhas’ spiritual transformations as their substance, some take
the sound of all beings’ goodness as their substance, and some take
the pure sound of the ocean of all buddhas’ meritorious qualities as
their substance. If one were to pursue an extensive explanation of
matters such as these, they would be as numerous as the atoms in
an ocean of worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The kṣetra systems92 are stable, marvelously adorned,
vast, pure, and treasuries of pure light.
They may take oceans of lotuses or jewels as bases of their existence
or they may exist in reliance on oceans of fragrance and such.
Taking the forms of Sumerus, cities, trees, or sacrificial platforms,
all the kṣetra systems exist everywhere in the ten directions.
They exist with many different adornments and forms.
Each and every one has its own arrangement in which it is established.
The substance of some of them is pure light.
Some consist of flower treasuries or clouds of jewels.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
193
Some kṣetra systems are composed of flaming radiance
or are established in an indestructible treasury of maṇi jewels,
Some consist of lamp clouds, multicolored flaming light, and such,
or consist of many different kinds of boundless pure forms.
Some take the sounds of speech as their essence
and are inconceivable proclamations of the Buddha.
Some consist of the sounds emanated through power of vows
or take sounds of spiritual transformations as their essence.
Some consist of the sounds of all beings’ great merit or karma.
So too may this be so for sounds of the buddhas’ meritorious qualities.
Every one of the different aspects of those kṣetra systems
is inconceivable and endless.
In this way, the ten directions are all everywhere filled with them.
Their vast adornments show the manifestations of spiritual powers.
All of the vast kṣetras throughout the ten directions
come and enter into this very world system.
Although one sees everything in the ten directions as entering into it,
in truth, they have neither any coming nor any entering at all.
As a single kṣetra system enters them all
and all of them without exception also enter a single one,
in essence and appearance, they remain just as before, no different,
and are incomparable, measureless, and all present everywhere.
Within all the atoms contained in all lands,
one everywhere sees the Tathāgata in those places.
The sound of uttering oceans of vows resounds like thunder’s tremors.
So it is that all beings are trained.
The body of the buddha pervades all the kṣetras.
So too do countless bodhisattvas also completely fill them.
The Tathāgata’s sovereign masteries are incomparable
in their universal teaching of all conscious beings.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, these fragrant oceans as numerous as the atoms
in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras are arrayed throughout
the Flower Treasury Adornment Ocean of Worlds like [the jewels
in] Indra’s Net.
Sons of the Buddha, the most central among these fragrant
oceans is called Boundless Light of Marvelous Flowers. Its ocean
floor is made of sovereign maṇi jewel banners showing the forms of
all bodhisattvas. It sends forth a great lotus flower called Adorned

194

The Flower Adornment Sutra
with Every Sort of Fragrant Sovereign Maṇi Jewel. There is a world
system dwelling above it named Blazing Jewel Light Everywhere
Illuminating the Ten Directions which is composed of all kinds of
adornments. Arrayed within it are worlds as numerous as the atoms
in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras.
There is a world in its lowest region named Most Supremely
Radiant Universal Illumination which is bordered by a wheel of
dazzling radiance with all kinds of vajra adornments. It rests on
flowers composed of many gems and maṇi jewels and it is shaped
like a maṇi jewel. It is covered above by clouds of jeweled flower
adornments and it is surrounded by worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra which have many different structures and
many different kinds of adornments. The buddha there is named
Immaculate Lamp of the Eye of Purity.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrous
Adornment with Various Kinds of Fragrant Lotuses which is bor­
dered by every kind of adornment. It rests on a jeweled lotus net
and it is shaped like a lion throne. It is covered above by clouds
of pearl banners in the colors of every kind of jewel and it is sur­
rounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in two buddha kṣetras.
The buddha there is named Lion Light’s Supreme Illumination.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universally
Illuminating Light of All Kinds of Jewel Adornments which is bor­
dered by a ring of fragrant breezes. It rests on various kinds of gar­
lands of jeweled flowers and it is octagonal in shape. It is covered
above by clouds of wondrously radiant maṇi jewel solar spheres and
it is surrounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in three bud­
dha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Supreme Banner of Pure
and Radiant Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adorned with
All Kinds of Radiant Flowers which is bordered by every kind of
king of jewels. It rests on an ocean of multicolored vajra śīla ban­
ners and it is shaped like a maṇi jewel lotus flower. It is covered
above by a light cloud of vajra and maṇi jewels and it is surrounded
by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in four bud­
dha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Fine Manifestation of Vajra
Radiance and the Power of Measureless Vigor.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universal

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
195
Emanation of Marvelous Floral Radiance which is bordered by a
net adorned with all kinds of jeweled chimes. It rests on an ocean
of every kind of forest adornment and jeweled wheel nets and it
is shaped like a polygon with many angles. It is covered above by
clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels emanating pure sounds. It is sur­
rounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in five buddha kṣetras.
The buddha there is named Ocean of Fragrant Light and the Power
of Joy.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pure and
Sublime Radiance which is bordered by banners adorned with the
kings of jewels. It rests on an ocean of vajra palaces and it is square
in shape. It is covered above by clouds of maṇi jewel sphere topknot
drapes and it is surrounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in
six buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Universally Radiant
Banner of Sovereign Mastery.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adorned with
the Flaming Light of Many Flowers which is bordered by many dif­
ferent kinds of floral adornments. It rests on an ocean of flaming
light the color of every kind of jewel and it is shaped like a tower. It
is covered above by clouds of robes the color of every type of jewel
and railings made of pearls. It is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in seven buddha kṣetras. The bud­
dha there is named Ocean of Joy Radiant with Famous Qualities
and Sovereign Mastery.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Producing
the Grounds of Awesome Power which is bordered by adornments
made of sovereign maṇi jewels emanating all kinds of sounds. It
rests on an ocean of space with lotus thrones the color of all jewels
and it is shaped like Indra’s net. It is covered above by clouds of
flower nets in an infinite array of colors and it is surrounded by
worlds as numerous as the atoms in eight buddha kṣetras. The bud­
dha there is named Banner of Vast Fame and an Ocean of Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Emanating
Marvelous Sounds which is bordered by a ring of adornments made
of mind king maṇi jewels. It rests on an ocean of sovereign maṇi
jewels constantly emanating clouds of adornments consisting of
all kinds of marvelous sounds and it is shaped like the body of a
Brahma Heaven king. It is covered above by clouds of lion thrones

196

The Flower Adornment Sutra
adorned with countless jewels and it is surrounded by worlds as
numerous as the atoms in nine buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is
named Invincible Appearance of Pure Moonlight.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Vajra Banner
which is bordered by jewel garlands from pearl treasuries of bound­
less adornments. It rests on an ocean of all kinds of adorning jew­
els, lion thrones, and maṇi jewels and it is shaped like a sphere. It
is covered above by a Sumeru-like cloud of flowers adorned with
all kinds of fragrant maṇi jewels as numerous as the atoms in ten
Mount Sumerus and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as
numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is
named Supreme King of the Ocean of All Dharmas.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Constantly
Emanating the Radiance of Sapphires which is bordered by adorn­
ments made of extremely durable and indestructible vajra. It rests on
an ocean of all different varieties of exotic flowers and it is shaped
like a half-moon. It is covered above by clouds of celestial jewel
curtains and it is surrounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms
in eleven buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Dharma of
Countless Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Dazzling
Illumination which is bordered by pervasively radiant adornments.
It rests on fragrant oceans adorned with swirls of flowers and it
is shaped like a swirl of flowers. It is covered above by clouds of
many different kinds of robes and it is surrounded by worlds as
numerous as the atoms in twelve buddha kṣetras. The buddha there
is named Transcending Indra and Brahmā.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, one arrives at this world named Sahā
which is bordered by adornments made of vajra. It rests on a net of
lotus flowers of all different colors supported by wind spheres and
it is shaped like empty space. It is covered above by clouds of empty
space adorned with celestial palaces perfect in every way and it is
surrounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in thirteen bud­
dha kṣetras. Its buddha is Vairocana Tathāgata, the Bhagavat.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Light of
Quiescence and Immaculate Purity which is bordered by all kinds
of jewel adornments. It rests on an ocean of various kinds of jeweled

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
197
robes and it is shaped like a vajra-wielding spirit. It is covered
above by an infinitely varicolored vajra cloud and it is surrounded
by worlds as numerous as the atoms in fourteen buddha kṣetras.
The buddha there is named Supreme Voice throughout the Dharma
Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Many Marvelously
Radiant Lamps which is bordered by curtains of all kinds of adorn­
ments. It rests on an ocean of pristine floral curtain nets and it is
shaped like a svastika emblem. It is covered above by clouds of per­
fumed oceans and maṇi jewel trees and it is surrounded by uni­
formly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in fifteen buddha
kṣetras. The buddha there is named Universally Radiant Banner of
Invincible Power.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universally
Illuminating Pure Light which is bordered by sovereign maṇi jewels
from endless clouds of gems. It rests on an ocean of many different
kinds of fragrant flaming-radiance lotus flowers and it is shaped
like a tortoise shell. It is covered above by clouds of halo-emanating
maṇi jewel spheres and sandalwood and it is surrounded by worlds
as numerous as the atoms in sixteen buddha kṣetras. The buddha
there is named Eye of Pure Sun-like Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Jewel Adornments which is bordered by sovereign maṇi jewels in
the forms of every kind of being. It rests on an ocean of light-trea­
sury sovereign maṇi jewels and it is shaped like an octagon. It is
covered above by a net of all kinds of mountain rings and flowering
trees adorned with jewels and it is surrounded by worlds as numer­
ous as the atoms in seventeen buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is
named Light of Unimpeded Wisdom Everywhere Illuminating the
Ten Directions.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Apart from
Defilement which is bordered by adornments displaying every
kind of extraordinarily marvelous appearance. It rests on an ocean
of lion thrones decorated with many marvelous flowers and it is
shaped like a jewel necklace. It is covered above by clouds of auras
produced by all kinds of gems and fragrant sovereign maṇi jew­
els and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as

198

The Flower Adornment Sutra
the atoms in eighteen buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named
Supreme Banner of Countless Skillful Means.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universally
Illuminating Pure Light which is bordered by sovereign maṇi jewels
sending forth endless clouds of gems. It rests on an ocean of Mount
Sumerus of infinitely varicolored fragrant flaming radiance and it
is shaped like swirling and spreading jeweled flowers. It is covered
above by clouds of infinitely varicolored radiant sovereign maṇi
jewels and sapphires and it is surrounded by worlds as numerous
as the atoms in nineteen buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named
Light of Emptiness Everywhere Illuminating the Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Flaming Radiance
of Marvelous Jewels which is bordered by pervasively radiant solar
and lunar jewels. It rests on an ocean of sovereign maṇi jewels in the
shape of every kind of deva and it is shaped like a jewel adornment.
It is covered above by clouds of all kinds of jeweled robe banners
and nets of treasuries of maṇi jewel lamps and it is surrounded by
uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha
kṣetras. The buddha there is named Light of the Signs of Merit.
Sons of the Buddha, this world system, Blazing Jewel Light
Everywhere Illuminating the Ten Directions, contains vast worlds
such as these surrounding it which are as numerous as the atoms
in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. Each world has its own
place in which it dwells, each has its own form, each has its own
essential nature, each has its own region, each has its own modes
of entry, each has its own adornments, each has its own specific
aspects, each has its own arrangement, each has its own ways in
which it does not differ, and each has its own empowerments. For
example, there are: worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha
kṣetras which are shaped like vortices; worlds as numerous as the
atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like rivers; worlds as
numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like
whirlpools; worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras
which are shaped like wheels; worlds as numerous as the atoms
in ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like sacrificial platforms;
worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are
shaped like forest groves; worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras which are shaped like viewing towers; worlds as
numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like
śīla banners; worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
199
which are shaped like common polygons; worlds as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like wombs;
worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are
shaped like lotuses; worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten bud­
dha kṣetras which are shaped like khārīka grain baskets; worlds as
numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like
many different types of beings; worlds as numerous as the atoms in
ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like the signs on the Buddha’s
body; worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which
are shaped like light spheres; worlds as numerous as the atoms in
ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like clouds; worlds as numer­
ous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which are shaped like nets;
and worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras which
are shaped like palace doors.
There are [worlds] such as these as numerous as the atoms in
an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. Every one of these worlds is
surrounded by vast worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha
kṣetras. Every one of these worlds also has a retinue of worlds as
numerous as the atoms [in the number of worlds] described above.
All the worlds described here reside within this Boundless Light
of Marvelous Flowers Fragrant Ocean or within the fragrant rivers
surrounding this ocean.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean to the east of this
Boundless Light of Marvelous Flowers Fragrant Ocean is known as
Treasury of Stainless Flaming Radiance. It sends forth a great lotus
flower called Marvelously Adorned with All Fragrant Sovereign
Maṇi Jewels. There is a world system residing above it called
Universally Illumining Kṣetra Vortex which is composed of the
roaring sound of the bodhisattva practices.
There is a world in its lowest regions named Palace Adornment
Banner. It is rectangular in shape and it rests on an ocean of all
kinds of jewel adornments. It is covered above by clouds of webs of
lotus flower light and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds
as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha there is
named Universally Illuminating Mid-brow Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Flower of
Virtue Treasury. It is spherical in shape and rests on an ocean of sta­
mens of every kind of jeweled flower. It is covered above by clouds

200

The Flower Adornment Sutra
of pearl banners and lion thrones and it is surrounded by worlds as
numerous as the atoms in two buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is
named Wisdom of the Ocean of All Boundless Dharmas.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wheel of Fine
Transformations and Sublime Fragrance. It is shaped like vajra and
it rests on an ocean of nets hung with bells adorned with all kinds of
jewels. It is covered above by clouds of halos with all kinds of adorn­
ments and it is surrounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms
in three buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Universally
Illuminating Light of the Signs of Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrously
Colored Light. It is shaped like a sphere of maṇi jewels and it rests
on a perfumed ocean of infinitely colored jewels. It is covered above
by clouds of pervasively radiant pearl towers and it is surrounded
by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in four bud­
dha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Fine Retinue Emanating
Pervasive Illumination.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sheltered by
the Canopy of Goodness. It is shaped like a lotus flower and it rests
on a perfumed ocean of vajra. It is covered above by perfumed
clouds of immaculate radiance and it is surrounded by worlds as
numerous as the atoms in five buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is
named Endless Wisdom of Dharma Joy.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Śirīṣa Flower
Light Wheel. It is triangular in shape and it rests on an ocean of all
kinds of solid jewel adornments. It is covered above by clouds of
light from bodhisattvas’ maṇi jewel crowns and it is surrounded by
worlds as numerous as the atoms in six buddha kṣetras. The buddha
there is named Cloud of Pure Pervasive Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jeweled Lotus
Flower. It is shaped like a half-moon and it rests on an ocean of
every kind of lotus flower adornment. It is covered above by clouds
of every kind of jeweled flower and it is surrounded by uniformly
pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in seven buddha kṣetras.
The buddha there is named Pure Eye of the Flower of Meritorious
Qualities.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
201
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Immaculate
Flaming Light Adornment. It is shaped like an array of jewel lan­
terns and it rests on an ocean of treasuries of flaming-light jewels. It
is covered above by clouds of various kinds of bodies always rain­
ing fragrant waters and it is surrounded by worlds as numerous
as the atoms in eight buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named
Invincible Wisdom Power.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sublime Pure
Sounds. It is shaped like a svastika emblem and it rests on an ocean
of jeweled robe banners. It is covered above by clouds of curtains
adorned with all kinds of flowers and it is surrounded by worlds as
numerous as the atoms in nine buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is
named Vast Eye like the Brightly Shining Moon in Space.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sounds as
Numerous as Atoms. It is shaped like Indra’s net and it rests on an
ocean of waters made of every kind of jewel. It is covered above by
clouds of jeweled canopies emanating all kinds of musical sounds
and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Gold
Colored Sumeru Lamp.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jewel-Colored
Adornment. It is shaped like a svastika emblem and it rests on an
ocean of jewel kings shaped like Indra. It is covered above by clouds
of sunlight flowers and it is surrounded by worlds as numerous
as the atoms in eleven buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named
Radiant Wisdom Extensively Illuminating the Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Marvelous
Golden Light. It is shaped like the walls of a vast city and it rests
on an ocean of all kinds of jewel adornments. It is covered above
by clouds of jeweled flowers from sites of enlightenment and it is
surrounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in twelve bud­
dha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Pervasively Illuminating
Banner of Jewel Lamps.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Illuminating Sphere of Light. It is shaped like wreath of flowers and
it rests on a swirling ocean of jeweled robes. It is covered above by

202

The Flower Adornment Sutra
clouds of viewing towers made of jewel kings emanating the voice
of the Buddha and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as
numerous as the atoms in thirteen buddha kṣetras. The buddha there
is named Pervasive Illumination of the Flaming Light of Lotuses.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jewel Treasury
Adornment. It is shaped like the four continents and it rests on a
Sumeru of jewel necklaces. It is covered above by clouds of the flam­
ing light of gems and maṇi jewels and it is surrounded by worlds
as numerous as the atoms in fourteen buddha kṣetras. The buddha
there is named Blooming Flower of Endless Merit.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Everywhere
Appearing Like Mirror Images. It is shaped like the body of an asura
and it rests on an ocean of vajra lotus flowers. It is covered above by
clouds of reflected light from jeweled crowns and it is surrounded
by worlds as numerous as the atoms in fifteen buddha kṣetras. The
buddha there is named Sound of Ambrosial Elixir.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sandalwood
Moon. It is shaped like an octagon and it rests on an ocean of vajra,
sandalwood, and jewels. It is covered above by clouds of pearls,
flowers, and maṇi jewels and it is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in sixteen buddha kṣetras. The
buddha there is named Peerless Wisdom of the Supreme Dharma.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Light of
Immaculate Purity. It is shaped like a whirlpool of fragrant waters
and it rests on an ocean of infinitely varicolored jewel light. It is cov­
ered above by clouds of sublime fragrance and radiance and it is sur­
rounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in seventeen buddha
kṣetras. The buddha there is named Light and Sound Everywhere
Illuminating Space.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sublime Floral
Adornment. It is shaped like a vortex and it rests on an ocean of all
kinds of flowers. It is covered above by clouds of maṇi jewels ema­
nating all kinds of musical sounds and it is surrounded by worlds
as numerous as the atoms in eighteen buddha kṣetras. The buddha
there is named Everywhere Manifesting Supreme Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adorned

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
203
with Supreme Sounds. It is shaped like a lion throne and it rests
on an ocean of gold lion thrones. It is covered above by clouds of
many-colored lotus flower dais lion thrones and it is surrounded by
worlds as numerous as the atoms in nineteen buddha kṣetras. The
buddha there is named Pervasive Radiance of Boundless and Well-
Known Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Lamp of
Lofty Supremacy. It is shaped like the Buddha’s palm and it rests
on an ocean of fragrant jeweled robe banners. It is covered above
by clouds of jewel king towers everywhere emanating light like the
sun and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous
as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named
Lamp Everywhere Illuminating Space.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean to the south of this
Treasury of Stainless Flaming Radiance Fragrant Ocean is a fra­
grant ocean known as Sphere of Endless Radiance. The world sys­
tem is known as Adorned with Banners of the Buddha. It consists of
the sound of the ocean of all buddhas’ meritorious qualities. Within
it, in its lowest region, there is a world called Lovely Flower. It is
shaped like a sphere of jewels and it rests on a maṇi jewel tree trea­
sury’s ocean of jewel kings. It is covered above by clouds of jewel
treasuries in the shape of transformationally manifested bodhisat­
tvas and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha there is named Joyful
Countenance of Lotus Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrous
Sound. The buddha there is named Jeweled Lamp of Sumeru.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Light of
Many Jewel Adornments. The buddha there is named Banner of the
Sounds of the Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Fragrance
Treasury Vajra. The buddha there is named Radiant Voice.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pure Sublime
Sound. The buddha there is named Supreme Power of Vigor.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jeweled Lotus

204

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Adornment. The buddha there is named Thunder of the City of
Dharma.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Bestowing
Happiness. The buddha there is named Greatly Renowned Lamp
of Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Undefiled Net.
The buddha there is named Ocean of Lion Light Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Illuminating Flower Forest Banner. The buddha there is named
Light of the Lotus of Great Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Measureless
Adornment. The buddha there is named Universal Eye Banner of
the Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Radiant Jewel Adornment. The buddha there is named Great
Caravan Leader of Supreme Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named King of
Flowers. The buddha there is named Moonlight Banner.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Stainless Purity. The buddha there is named Pure Enlightenment.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jewel Light.
The buddha there is named Lamp of the Space of Omniscience.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Producing
Jewel Necklaces. The buddha there is named Light of the Signs
Produced by the Perfections’ Ocean of Merit.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrous
Wheel Sheltering Everyone. The buddha there is named Enabler of
Joy by Training All Minds with Defiled Attachments.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jeweled Flower
Banner. The buddha there is named Greatly Renowned Voice of
Vast Qualities.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
205
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Measureless
Adornment. The buddha there is named Ocean of Qualities Arising
from the Light of Impartial Knowledge.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner of
Endless Radiant Adornments. It is shaped like a lotus flower and it
rests on an ocean of nets of all kinds of jewels. It is covered above
by a net of lotus light maṇi jewels and it is surrounded by uniformly
pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras.
The buddha there is named Pure Light of the Dharma Realm.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction
from this Sphere of Endless Radiance Fragrant Ocean, the next fra­
grant ocean is known as Flaming Light of Vajra Jewels. The world
system is known as Treasury of the Buddhas’ Radiant Adornments.
Its essence consists of the sound of praising all tathāgatas’ names.
Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a world called Flaming
Jewel Light of Lotuses. It is shaped like a mid-brow hair mark the
color of maṇi jewels and it rests on an ocean of whirlpools the color
of every sort of jewel. It is covered above by clouds of towers with
every kind of adornment and it is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha
there is named Immaculate Jewel Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Flaming Light. The buddha there is named Light of Unimpeded
Sovereign Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jeweled
Wheel’s Wondrous Adornments. The buddha there is named Light
of Every Jewel.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner
of Sandalwood Tree Blossoms. The buddha there is named Pure
Wisdom Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Buddha
Kṣetra’s Wondrous Adornments. The buddha there is named Sound
of Vast Joy.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sublime Light

206

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Adornment. The buddha there is named Sovereign Wisdom of the
Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Boundless
Signs. The buddha there is named Unimpeded Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner of
Flaming Light Clouds. The buddha there is named Orator of the
Irreversible Wheel.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pure Wheel
of Many Jewel Adornments. The buddha there is named Floral
Radiance of Immaculate Purity.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Vast Emancipation.
The buddha there is named Eye of the Unimpeded Wisdom Sun.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wonderfully
Adorned Vajra Throne. The buddha there is named Vast Brilliance
of Dharma Realm Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universal
Adornment of Wisdom. The buddha there is named Wisdom
Torchlight King.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Deep and
Sublime Sound of the Lotus Pool. The buddha there is named
Universal Illumination of Omniscience.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Various Kinds
of Colored Light. The buddha there is named Regal Cloud of Ever
Radiant Flowers.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner of
Marvelous Jewels. The buddha there is named Light of Meritorious
Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Light of Maṇi
Jewel Flowers and the Mid-Brow Hair Mark. The buddha there is
named Cloud of Pervasive Voices.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Extremely

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
207
Deep Ocean. The buddha there is named Lord of the Beings of the
Ten Directions.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sumeru Light.
The buddha there is named Voice of the Universal Knowledge of the
Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Golden Lotus.
The buddha there is named Pervasive Radiance of a Treasury of
Merit.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Jewel Adornments. It is shaped like the svastika emblem and it rests
on an ocean of trees adorned with maṇi jewels emanating every
kind of fragrance. It is covered above by clouds of pure light and it
is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms
in twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Great Web of
Transformationally Created Light.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction
from this Flaming Light of Vajra Jewels Fragrant Ocean, the next
fragrant ocean is known as Sapphire Adornment. The world sys­
tem is known as Light Illuminating the Ten Directions. It rests on
a fragrant cloud of all kinds of marvelously adorned lotus flowers.
Its essence consists of the boundless voice of the Buddha. Within it,
in the very lowest region, there is a world called Wheel of the Ten
Directions’ Treasuries of Endless Colors. It is shaped like a vortex
with countless angles and it rests on an ocean of all kinds of jewel
treasuries in infinite colors. It is covered above by a net of Indra
and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha there is named Pervasively
Illuminating Lotus Eye Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury
of Pure and Marvelous Adornments. The buddha there is named
Great Lion of Unsurpassable Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Producing
Lotus Thrones. The buddha there is named King of Universally
Illuminating Dharma Realm Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jeweled

208

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Banner Sound. The buddha there is named Universally Renowned
Great Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Vajra Jewel Adornments. The buddha there is named Lotus Flower
Sunlight.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Indra Flower
Moon. The buddha there is named Banner of Dharma’s Sovereign
Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrous
Wheel Treasury. The buddha there is named Pure Voice of Great
Joy.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Wondrous Sounds. The buddha there is named Caravan Leader of
Immensely Powerful Goodness.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pure Moon. The
buddha there is named Sumeru of the Power of Radiant Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Signs of Boundless
Adornments. The buddha there is named Pure Moonlight of Skillful
Means and Vows.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrous
Flower Sound. The buddha there is named Voice of the Dharma
Ocean’s Great Vows.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adorned
with Every Jewel. The buddha there is named Radiant Signs of the
Meritorious Qualities’ Jewels.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Solid Ground.
The buddha there is named Beautifully Sounding Supreme Deva.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Radiant Skillful Transformation. The buddha there is named
Quiescent Wisdom of Great Vigor.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Skillfully Guarded

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
209
Adorning Practices. The buddha there is named Gladdening the
Beholder.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Sandalwood Jewel Flowers. The buddha there is named Universal
Illumination of the Light of Extremely Profound and Unshakable
Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Ocean
Manifesting Various Forms and Features. The buddha there is
named Everywhere Emanating the Inconceivable Radiance of the
King of Supreme Meanings.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Great Radiance
Transformationally Manifested throughout the Ten Directions. The
buddha there is named Incomparably Awesome Light of Supreme
Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sumeru
Cloud Banner. The buddha there is named Eye of Extreme Purity’s
Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Illuminating Lotus. It is shaped like a sphere and it rests on an infi­
nitely varicolored ocean of many marvelously fragrant maṇi jewels.
It is covered above by clouds of all vehicles’ adornments and it is
surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in
twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Sun of the Vigor
of Liberation.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction from
this Sapphire Adornment Fragrant Ocean, the next fragrant ocean is
known as Adorned Depths of the Vajra Wheel. The world system is
known as Indra’s Net Inset with Wondrous Jewels. Its essence con­
sists of the sound created by the wisdom of Samantabhadra. Within
it, in the very lowest region, there is a world called Lotus Flower
Net. It is shaped like Mount Sumeru and it rests on an ocean of
many marvelous flower mountain banners. It is covered above by
clouds of Indra’s nets adorned with sovereign maṇi jewels showing
the realms of the buddhas and it is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha
there is named Universally Enlightened Wisdom of the Dharma
Body.

210

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Endless
Sunlight. The buddha there is named Wisdom of Supremely Great
Enlightenment.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universal
Emanation of Sublime Light. The buddha there is named Endless
Power of a Cloud of Great Merit.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Tree Blossom
Banner. The buddha there is named Voice of Boundless Knowledge
of the Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pearl Canopy.
The buddha there is named Pāramitā Lion Sprint.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Boundless Sound.
The buddha there is named Wonderfully Enlightened Wisdom of
Omniscience.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Everywhere
Visible Forested Peaks. The buddha there is named Appearing
Before Beings Everywhere.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Radiance of
the Lion’s Net of Indra. The buddha there is named Cloud of Golden
Light from the Sun of Undefiled Purity.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Inlaid
with Many Jewels. The buddha there is named Imperial Banner’s
Supreme Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Ground of
Undefiled Radiance. The buddha there is named Pure Moon of All
Powers.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Constantly
Emanating Sounds in Praise of Buddha’s Qualities. The buddha
there is named Space-like Wisdom of Universal Enlightenment.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury
of Towering Flaming Radiance. The buddha there is named

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
211
Transformationally Manifesting Great Cloud Banners in the Ten
Directions.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Site of
Enlightenment Adorned with Radiance. The buddha there is named
Universal Illumination of Peerless Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Generating
Every Jeweled Adornment. The buddha there is named King of the
Spiritual Superknowledges Who Extensively Liberates Beings.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Marvelous
Light-Adorned Palace. The buddha there is named Vast Wisdom
Knowing All Meanings.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Dust-Transcending
Quiescence. The buddha there is named Not Appearing in Vain.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Maṇi Jewel
Flower Banner. The buddha there is named Auspicious Mind-
Pleasing Sound.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universal
Cloud Treasury. It is shaped like a tower and it rests on a perfumed
ocean of various kinds of palaces. It is covered above by clouds of
all kinds of jeweled lamps and it is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras. The
buddha there is named King of Supremely Enlightened Spiritual
Superknowledges.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction
from this Adorned Depths of the Vajra Wheel Fragrant Ocean,
the next fragrant ocean is known as Indra’s Net of Lotuses. The
world system is known as Manifesting Reflections throughout the
Ten Directions. It rests on a lotus flower adorned with all kinds of
fragrant maṇi jewels. Its essence consists of the sounds of all bud­
dhas’ wisdom light. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a
world called Jewel Light of the Ocean of Beings. It is shaped like
a treasury of pearls and it rests on a whirlpool within an ocean of
all kinds of maṇi jewel necklaces. It is covered above by clouds of
water-radiance maṇi jewels and it is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha

212

The Flower Adornment Sutra
there is named Universally Illuminating Moon of Inconceivable
Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sphere
of Marvelous Fragrance. The buddha there is named Banner of
Measureless Powers.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sphere
of Marvelous Radiance. The buddha there is named Enlightened
Wisdom of the Dharma Realm’s Light and Sound.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Roaring Maṇi
Jewel Banner. The buddha there is named Lotus Radiance Ever
Extending Wondrous Arms.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sphere of
Extreme Solidity. The buddha there is named Light of the Ocean of
Irreversible Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Radiant
Adornments of the Many Practices. The buddha there is named
Bhagavat of Universally Supreme Omniscience.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Illuminating Lion Throne. The buddha there is named Lion Light’s
Immeasurably Powerful Enlightened Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Flaming Jewel
Radiance Adornment. The buddha there is named Pure Knowledge
of All Dharmas.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Countless
Lamps. The buddha there is named Signs of Sorrowlessness.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Always
Hearing the Buddha’s Voice. The buddha there is named Awesome
Radiance of Natural Supremacy .
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numer­
ous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pure
Transformations. The buddha there is named Golden Lotus Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Everywhere

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
213
Entering the Ten Directions. The buddha there is named Lion-Sprint
Wisdom Contemplating the Dharma Realm.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Blazing Flames.
The buddha there is named Tree of Blazing Light Kiṃnara King.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Illuminating Fragrant Light. The buddha there is named Fragrant
Lamp and King of Skillful Teaching.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sphere
of Countless Floral Accumulations. The buddha there is named
Everywhere Manifesting the Buddha’s Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Complete
Purity of the Many Sublimities. The buddha there is named King
of the Identity of All Dharmas and the Spiritual Superknowledges.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Ocean of
Golden Light. The buddha there is named Sovereign Mastery of
Great Transformations throughout the Ten Directions.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Treasury of
Pearl Flowers. The buddha there is named Inconceivable Wisdom
Light of the Dharma Realm’s Jewels.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Indra’s Sumeru
Lion Throne. The buddha there is named Light of Supreme Powers.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasive
Illumination of Boundlessly Many Jewels. It is shaped like a rect­
angle and it rests on an ocean of flower forests. It is covered above
by an Indra’s net which everywhere rains infinitely varicolored sov­
ereign maṇi jewels and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds
as numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha
there is named Supreme Voice Everywhere Illuminating the World.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction
from this Indra’s Net of Lotuses Fragrant Ocean, the next fragrant
ocean is known as Fragrant Treasury of Collected Jewels. The world
system is known as Adorned with Every Kind of Awesome Virtue.
Its essence consists of the sounds emanating from the Dharma
wheel of all buddhas. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is

214

The Flower Adornment Sutra
a world called All Different Kinds of Creations. It is shaped like a
vajra and it rests on a banner of all different sorts of vajra moun­
tains. It is covered above by clouds of vajra jewel radiance and it is
surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms
in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha there is named Lotus Flower Eyes.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Joyously
Perceived Sound. The buddha there is named Creating Joy.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner of
Jewel Adornments. The buddha there is named Omniscience.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasive
Illumination of Tāla Blossoms. The buddha there is named Sublime
Sound of Undefiled Quiescence.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Transformational
Radiance. The buddha there is named Wisdom Moon of Pure
Emptiness.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Many Marvelous
Inlays. The buddha there is named Revealing the Signs of the Ocean
of Merit’s Dense Clouds.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Marvelous
Sounds of All Kinds of Adornments. The buddha there is named
Cloud of Joy.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Lotus Pool.
The buddha there is named Famous Banner.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adorned with
All Kinds of Jewels. The buddha there is named Eye of the Lion
Sprint Contemplations.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pure Marvelous
Flower. The buddha there is named Endless Vajra Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named City of Lotus
Adornments. The buddha there is named Pervasive Light of the
Solar Treasury’s Eye.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
215
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Countless Forested
Peaks. The buddha there is named Thunder of All Dharmas.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sunlight. The
buddha there is named Revealing Measureless Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Abiding in
Lotus Petals. The buddha there is named Mountain of All Merit.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Sustaining Winds. The buddha there is named Sunlight Faculties.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Manifestation
of Brilliance. The buddha there is named Pervasively Illuminating
Physical Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Fragrant
Thunder’s Pervasive Vajra Jewel Illumination. The buddha there is
named Signs of the Blooming of the Supreme Flower.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adornments
of Indra’s Net. It is shaped like balustrades and rests on an ocean
of every sort of adornment. It is covered above by clouds of flam­
ing light towers and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as
numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha there
is named Cloud Manifesting Fearlessness.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction
from this Fragrant Treasury of Collected Jewels Fragrant Ocean,
the next fragrant ocean is known as Jewel Adornments. The world
system is known as Completely Undefiled. Its essence consists of
the sounds of spiritual transformations occurring in buddha kṣetras
even within all atoms. Within it, in the very lowest region, there
is a world called Pure, Marvelous, and Level. It is shaped like the
body of a jewel and it rests on an ocean of radiant spheres made of
all kinds of jewels. It is covered above by clouds of various kinds of
sandalwood, maṇi jewels, and pearls and it is surrounded by uni­
formly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra.
The buddha there is named Invincible and Peerless Banner.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Blazing

216

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Wonderful Adornments. The buddha there is named King of Lotus
Flower Wisdom and Spiritual Superknowledges.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Spherical Banner
of Sublime Signs. The buddha there is named Endless Radiance
Renowned throughout the Ten Directions.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrous
Adornments of Flame-Core Maṇi Jewels. The buddha there is
named Great Wisdom Delighting All Who See or Hear.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adorned
with Wondrous Flowers. The buddha there is named Measureless
Powers and Supreme Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Producing
Pure Atoms. The buddha there is named Transcending Brahmā.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasively
Radiant Transformational Fragrance. The buddha there is named
Musth Elephant with the Great Strength of Vajra.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Light Vortex.
The buddha there is named Meaningful Good Reputation.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Ocean of Jewel
Necklaces. The buddha there is named Incomparable Pervasively
Illuminating Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner
of Wondrous Floral Lamps. The buddha there is named Lamp of
Ultimate Qualities and Unimpeded Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adorned with
Skillful Means. The buddha there is named Pāramitā of the Wisdom
Sun.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pervasive
Radiance of Sandalwood Blossoms. The buddha there is named
Voice of Boundless Dharma Realm Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner of

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
217
Indra’s Net. The buddha there is named Far-Reaching Lamplight
Illumination.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sphere of Pure
Flowers. The buddha there is named Light of the Dharma Realm
Sun.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Great Awesome
Brilliance. The buddha there is named Voice of the Dharma Wheel
and the Ocean of Boundless Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Dwelling
Together Peacefully in Jeweled Lotus Pool. The buddha there is
named Expositor of the Entry to Inconceivable Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Level Ground.
The buddha there is named Radiant King of the Jewels of the
Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Collection
of Fragrant Maṇi Jewels. The buddha there is named Wondrous
Adornments of the Ocean of Endless Merit.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sublime Light.
The buddha there is named Pervasive Voice of the Peerless Powers.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Dazzling
Illumination of the Ten Directions’ Pervasive Solid Adornments. It
is shaped like an octagon and it rests on an ocean of mind king maṇi
jewel spheres. It is covered above by clouds of curtains adorned with
every kind of jewel and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds
as numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha
there is named Great Bright Lamp of the Universal Eye.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction
from this Jewel Adornments Fragrant Ocean, the next fragrant
ocean is known as Mass of Vajra Jewels. The world system is known
as Dharma Realm Conduct. Its essence consists of the sound of the
expedient dharmas used on all bodhisattva grounds. Within it, in
the very lowest region, there is a world called Dazzling Radiance of
the Light of Purity. It is shaped like a strand of pearls and it rests on
an ocean of pearl necklaces the color of every kind of jewel. It is cov­
ered above by clouds of bodhisattva pearl topknots and radiant maṇi

218

The Flower Adornment Sutra
jewels and it is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha there is named Light of
Supreme Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Wondrous
Canopy. The buddha there is named Wisdom of the Sovereign
Mastery of Dharma.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jewel Adorned
Lion Throne. The buddha there is named Great Dragon Pool.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Revealing
Vajra Thrones. The buddha there is named Ascending Lion Throne’s
Lotus Dais.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Supreme Sound
of Lotuses. The buddha there is named Universally Awakening
Wisdom Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Fine Habitual
Propensities. The buddha there is named Sublime Radiance King
Who Preserves the Earth.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sound of Joy
and Bliss. The buddha there is named King of the Dharma Lamp.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Maṇi Jewel
Treasury of Indra’s Net. The buddha there is named Not Seen in
Vain.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Terrestrial
Treasury of the Many Sublimities. The buddha there is named
Banner of the Body of Flaming Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sphere of Golden
Light. The buddha there is named Purifying Beings’ Conduct.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adornments
of Mount Sumeru. The buddha there is named Pervasively Radiant
Cloud of All Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Shape of Many

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
219
Trees. The buddha there is named Pure Moon Awakening of the
Bejeweled Floral Appearance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Free of Fear.
The buddha there is named Supreme Torch of Golden Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Greatly Renowned
Dragon King Banner. The buddha there is named Contemplation of
All Dharmas’ Equality.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Manifesting
the Colors of Maṇi Jewels. The buddha there is named Sun of
Transformations.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Flaming
Lamplight Adornment. The buddha there is named Pervasively
Illuminating Light of the Jeweled Canopy.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Cloud of
Fragrant Light. The buddha there is named Contemplative Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Free of
Adversaries. The buddha there is named Ocean of Vigor’s Supreme
Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Radiant
Banner of All Kinds of Adornments. The buddha there is named
Sovereign King Everywhere Manifesting Mind-Delighting Lotuses.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Adornment of
the Mid-Brow Hair Mark. It is shaped like a half-moon and it rests
on an ocean of Mount Sumeru’s Maṇi Jewel Flowers. It is covered
above by clouds of sovereign maṇi jewels emanating all kinds of
adorning blazing radiance and it is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras. The
buddha there is named Pure Eye.
Sons of the Buddha, circling around in a rightward direction
from this Mass of Vajra Jewels Fragrant Ocean, the next fragrant
ocean is known as Jeweled Parapet of the Celestial Ramparts. The
world system is known as Light of the Lamp’s Flames. Its essence
consists of the sound of the wheel everywhere revealing the dharma
of the identity of all things. Within it, in the very lowest region,

220

The Flower Adornment Sutra
there is a world called Sphere of the Jeweled Moon’s Flaming Light.
It is shaped like an array of all objects of adornment and it rests
on an ocean of flowers adorned with all kinds of jewels. It is cov­
ered above by clouds of vaiḍūrya-colored lion thrones and it is sur­
rounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in a
buddha kṣetra. The buddha there is named Sovereign Radiance of
the Sun and Moon.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Jeweled Light
of Sumeru. The buddha there is named Banner of Endless Dharma
Jewels.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Banner of the
Many Sublimities’ Radiance. The buddha there is named Great
Accumulation of Flowers.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Flower of Maṇi
Jewel Radiance. The buddha there is named Freest of All Men.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Universal Sound.
The buddha there is named Universal Illumination of Omniscience.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sound of the
Great Kiṃnara Tree. The buddha there is named Sovereign Dragon
of Measureless Merit.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Light of Boundless
Purity. The buddha there is named Light of the Bejeweled Flower of
Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Supreme
Sound. The buddha there is named Adorned with Omniscience.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Interspersed
Decorations of Many Jewels. The buddha there is named Mount
Sumeru of Flaming Jewel Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Pure Sound
of Sumeru. The buddha there is named Manifest Radiance of All
Practices.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Perfumed Canopy.
The buddha there is named Ocean of All Unimpeded Pāramitās.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
221
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Lion Flower
Net. The buddha there is named Banner of Flaming Jewel Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Vajra Lamp of
Marvelous Flowers. The buddha there is named Light of All Great
Vows.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Ground of the
Light of All Dharmas. The buddha there is named All Dharmas’
Vast True Meaning.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Evenly
Adorned with the Powder of Pearls. The buddha there is named
Net of Supreme Wisdom’s Radiance.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Vaiḍūrya
Flower. The buddha there is named Banner of Collected Jewels.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Sphere of
Measureless Marvelous Light. The buddha there is named Oceanic
Treasury of Great Awesomely Powerful Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Clear Vision
of the Ten Directions. The buddha there is named Banner of Pure
Cultivation of All Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, there is a world named Delightful
Sound of Purity. It is shaped like a buddha’s hand and it rests on an
ocean of nets of jewel light. It is covered above by clouds of all adorn­
ments worn by bodhisattvas and it is surrounded by uniformly
pure worlds as numerous as the atoms in twenty buddha kṣetras.
The buddha there is named Unimpeded Radiance Everywhere
Illuminating the Dharma Realm.
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the great
assembly, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean to the east of this
Treasury of Stainless Flaming Radiance Fragrant Ocean is a fra­
grant ocean known as Transformationally Created Sublime Bodies.
Within this ocean, there is a world system known as Region of Well-
Distributed Distinctions.

222

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Vajra Eye
Banner. The world system is known as Bridge Adorning the Dharma
Realm.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Marvelous
Adornments of All Different Kinds of Lotuses. The world system
is known as Constantly Sending Forth Transformations throughout
the Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Sphere of
Continuous Jewel Kings. The world system is known as Dense
Clouds of Jeweled Lotus Stems.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Everywhere
Adorned with Marvelous Fragrances and Flaming Light. The world
system is known as Vairocana’s Transformative Practices.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Jewel Powder
Jambu Banner. The world system is known as Realm Protected by
All Buddhas.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Flaming
Radiance of Every Color. The world system is known as Pervasive
Illumination of Supreme Radiance.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Realm of
All Kinds of Adornments. The world system is known as Lamp
Emanating the Flaming Light of Jewels.
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as the
atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant ocean
closest to the ring of mountains is called Crystal Ground. The world
system is known as Always Emanating Light. Its essence consists
of the sound of pure kalpas in an ocean of worlds. Within it, in the
very lowest region, there is a world called Banner of Delightful Pure
Radiance which is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numer­
ous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha there is named
Vigor and Wisdom of Supreme Samādhi.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra Banner
World, there is a world named Banner of Fragrant Adornments. It
is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms
in ten buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Unobstructed
Dharma Realm Lamp.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in three buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Sahā
World, there is a world named Treasury of Emanated Light. The
buddha there is named Unobstructed Wisdom Light Pervading the
Dharma Realm.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
223
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in seven buddha kṣetras, in the highest region of this world
system, there is a world known as Supreme Physical Fragrance. It
is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms
in twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Flower of the
Limbs of Enlightenment.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond that Sphere
of Endless Radiance Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean known
as Complete Sublime Radiance. The world system is known as
Everywhere Free of Defilement.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Canopy of
Dazzling Radiance. The world system is known as Boundless
Universal Adornment.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Wondrous
Jewel Adornment. The world system is known as Fragrant Maṇi
Jewel Patterns.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Emanating
Buddha’s Voice. The world system is known as Well Established
Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Sumeru
Treasury of Fragrant Banners. The world system is known as
Pervasively Full Radiance.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Marvelous
Sandalwood Light. The world system is known as Sphere of Flaming
Floral Radiance.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Sustained by
Wind Power. The world system is known as Flaming Jewel Radiance
Cloud Banner.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Physical
Adornments of Indra. The world system is known as Pearl Treasury.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Level and
Purified. The world system is known as Various Vaiḍūrya Powder
Adornments.
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as the
atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant ocean
closest to the ring of mountains is called Marvelous Tree Flowers.
The world system is known as Producing Vast Kṣetras Everywhere.
Its essence consists of the sounds of māras vanquished by all bud­
dhas. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a world called
Flaming Torchlight Banner. The buddha there is named Ocean of
the World’s Meritorious Qualities.

224

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra
Banner World, there is a world named Generating Jewels. The bud­
dha there is named Jewel Cloud of the Lion’s Powers.
Above this world, on the same level as the Sahā World, there is a
world named Robe Banner. The buddha there is named King of the
Ocean of Omniscience.
In the highest region of this world system, there is world called
Jewel Necklace Lion Light. The buddha there is named Skillful
Transformations Lotus Banner.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond the Flaming
Light of Vajra Fragrant Ocean93 is a fragrant ocean known as
Lustrous Decorative Banner of All Adornments. The world system
is known as Adorned with Pure Conduct.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Ocean of
Dazzling Light from All Kinds of Jeweled Flowers. The world system
is known as Adorned with the Signs of the Meritorious Qualities.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Blooming
Lotus. The world system is known as Bodhisattvas’ Maṇi Jewel
Crown Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Marvelously
Jeweled Robes. The world system is known as Sphere of Pure Pearls.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Pervasively
Radiant Delightful Flowers. The world system is known as Dazzling
Illumination of a Hundred Light Clouds.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Great Space-
Pervading Radiance. The world system is known as Pervasively
Illuminating Jewel Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Banner of
Wondrous Floral Adornment. The world system is known as Golden
Moon Eye Necklace.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Treasury of a
Fragrant Ocean of Pearls. The world system is known as Buddha
Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Radiance of
Jewel Spheres. The world system is known as Radiance Skillfully
Conjuring the Realms of the Buddhas.
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as
the atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant
ocean closest to the ring of mountains is called Depths Adorned
with Boundlessly Many Spheres. The world system is known as
Countless Regional Distinctions. Its essence consists of the sounds

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
225
of the many different languages of all countries. Within it, in the
very lowest region, there is a world called Vajra Flower Canopy.
The buddha there is named Sound of the Universal Gateway to the
Inexhaustible Light of the Signs.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra Banner
World, there is a world named Banner Producing Jeweled Robes.
The buddha there is named Great Awesome Power of a Cloud of
Merit.
Above this world, on the same level as the Sahā World, there is a
world named Marvelous Adornments of Many-Jeweled Ornaments.
The buddha there is named Ocean of Supreme Wisdom.
In the highest region of this world system, there is world called
Banner of Sunlight Robes. The buddha there is named Lotus Cloud
of the Wisdom Sun.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond the Sapphire
Adornment Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean known as Palace
of the Asuras. The world system is known as Sustained by the
Perfumed Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Jeweled Lion
Adornment. The world system is known as Everywhere Revealing
All Jewels of the Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Cloud of
Palaces’ Colored Lights. The world system is known as Jeweled
Wheels’ Wondrous Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Producing Great
Lotuses. The world system is known as Wondrous Adornments
Everywhere Illuminating the Dharma Realm.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Wondrous Eyes
of Flaming Lamplight. The world system is known as Everywhere
Contemplating the Transformations of the Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Sphere
of Inconceivable Adornments. The world system is known as
Universally Renowned Light of the Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Adorned with
Collected Jewels. The world system is known as Dazzling Lamplight
Illumination.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Light of Pristine
Jewels. The world system is known as Wind Even Sumeru Cannot
Obstruct.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Jeweled Robe
Balustrade. The world system is known as Light of the Tathāgata’s
Body.

226

The Flower Adornment Sutra
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as
the atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant
ocean closest to the ring of mountains is called Banner of Tree
Adornments. The world system is known as Peacefully Dwelling
in Indra’s Net. Its essence consists of the sounds of all the bodhisat­
tva wisdom grounds. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a
world called Marvelous Color of Gold. The buddha there is named
Supremely Awesome Radiance of Fragrant Flaming Light.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra
Banner World, there is a world named Maṇi Jewel Tree Blossoms.
The buddha there is named Unimpeded Pervasive Appearances.
Above this world, on the same level as the Sahā World, there is a
world named Wonderful Vaiḍūrya Adornments. The buddha there
is named Solid Wisdom of Sovereign Dharma Mastery.
In the highest region of this world system, there is world called
Marvelous Adornments of the Voice of Brahmā. The buddha there
is named King of Blooming Lotus Light.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond that Vajra
Wheel Adorned Depths Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean known
as Place of Transformationally Created Lotuses. The world system
is known as Land of Impartiality and Honesty.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Maṇi Jewel
Radiance. The world system is known as No Delusion Anywhere in
the Dharma Realm.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Many
Marvelous Fragrant Solar Maṇi Jewels. The world system is known
as Appearing throughout the Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Constantly
Imbibing Streams of Jewels. The world system is known as
Everywhere Enacting the Buddha’s Words.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Boundless
Profoundly Sublime Sounds. The world system is known as
Countless Regional Differences.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Solid
Accumulations. The world system is known as Distinctions in
Countless Places.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Pure Sound
of Brahmā. The world system is known as Completely Pure
Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Treasury of
Sandalwood Balustrade Sounds. The world system is known as Far-
Reaching Banner.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
227
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Radiant
Adornments of Marvelously Fragrant Jewel Kings. The world sys­
tem is known as Everywhere Revealing the Power of Light.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond that Indra’s
Net of Lotuses Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean known as
Wondrous Silver Lotus Adornments. The world system is known as
Universal Conduct.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Dense Flaming
Light Clouds of Vaiḍūrya Bamboo. The world system is known as
Everywhere Producing the Sounds of the Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Mass of Flaming
Light throughout the Ten Directions. The world system is known as
Constantly Emanating Transformations Spreading throughout the
Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Maṇi Jewel
Banner Revealing Real Gold. The world system is known as Vajra
Banner Appearance.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Great Equal
Adornments. The world system is known as Vortex of Dharma
Realm Courage.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Endless
Radiance of Multitudes of Jeweled Flowers. The world system is
known as Boundless Pure Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Marvelous
Banner of Gold. The world system is known as Place Where Subtle
Secrets are Expounded.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Pervasive
Illumination of Radiant Reflections. The world system is known as
Universal Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Quiescent
Sound. The world system is known as Appearing as Drapes.
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as
the atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant
ocean closest to the ring of mountains is called Banner of Dense
Flaming Light Clouds. The world system is known as Adorned with
All Kinds of Light. Its essence consists of the sounds of the congre­
gations at all tathāgatas’ sites of enlightenment. Within it, in the very
lowest region, there is a world called Pure-Eyed Adornment. The
buddha there is named Vajra Moon Everywhere Illuminating the
Ten Directions.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra Banner

228

The Flower Adornment Sutra
World, there is a world named Lotus Flower Virtue. The buddha
there is named Great Vigor’s Thoroughly Enlightened Wisdom.
Above this world, on the same level as the Sahā World, there is a
world named Dense Vajra Adornments. The buddha there is named
Śā la King Banner.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in seven buddha kṣetras, there is a world named Adorned
with an Ocean of Purity. The buddha there is named Peerless
Awesome Virtue That None Can Subdue.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond that Fragrant
Treasury of Collected Jewels Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean
known as Pervasive Illumination of the Light of All Jewels. The
world system is known as Adorned with an Immaculate Reputation.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Blossoming of
Many Bejeweled Flowers. The world system is known as Spacious
Appearance.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Pervasive
Illumination of Auspicious Pavilions. The world system is known
as Everywhere Adorned with Unimpeded Radiance.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Sandalwood
Tree Blossoms. The world system is known as Vortex Appearing
throughout the Ten Directions.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Producing
Wonderfully Colored Jewels. The world system is known as
Universally Traveling Banner of Supremacy.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Universally
Produced Vajra Flowers. The world system is known as Manifesting
Inconceivable Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Adorned with
Mind King Maṇi Jewel Wheels. The world system is known as
Manifesting the Unimpeded Light of the Buddha.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Necklace of
Collected Jewels. The world system is known as Purifying Doubts.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Everywhere
Adorned with Pearl Wheels. The world system is known as That
Which Flows from the Buddhas’ Vows.
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as the
atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant ocean
closest to the ring of mountains is called Sphere of Jambūnada Jewel
Treasuries. The world system is known as Universal Sound Banner.
Its essence consists of the voice which enters the gateway of omni­
science. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a world called

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
229
Flaming Light of Flower Stamens. The buddha there is named
Vigorous Giving.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as the
atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra Banner
World, there is a world named Lotus Light Banner. The buddha
there is named Supreme Mind King of All Meritorious Qualities.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in three buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Sahā
World, there is a world named Adorned with the Ten Powers. The
buddha there is named King Who Skillfully Reveals Measureless
Meritorious Qualities.
In the highest region of this world system, there is world called
Mountain Banner of Maṇi Jewel Fragrance. The buddha there is
named Vast Eye of Goodness Who Purifies One of Doubts.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond that Jewel
Adornments Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean known as Treasury
Holding the Light of Sumeru. The world system is known as
Producing Vast Clouds.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Realm of the
Great Awesome Power of Various Kinds of Adornments. The world
system is known as Adorned with Unimpeded Purity.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Densely Spread
Bejeweled Lotuses. The world system is known as Supreme Lamp
Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Resting on All
Kinds of Jewel Adornments. The world system is known as Treasury
of Sunlight Nets.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Abundant
Purification. The world system is known as Resting Place of the
Jeweled Flowers.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Extremely
Intelligent Conduct. The world system is known as Adorned with
Supreme Forms.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Peak Holding
Marvelous Maṇi Jewels. The world system is known as Treasury of
Completely Pure Space.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Pervasive
Illumination of Great Radiance. The world system is known as
Torchlight of Sapphires.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Filled with
Pervasively Radiant Delightful Maṇi Pearls. The world system is
known as Pervasive Roaring.

230

The Flower Adornment Sutra
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous
as the atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fra­
grant ocean closest to the ring of mountains is called Producing
Sapphires. The world system is known as Everywhere Free of
Differences. Its essence consists of the tremor-inducing roar of all
bodhisattvas. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a world
called Wonderfully Supreme Treasury. The buddha there is named
Supreme Meritorious Qualities and Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra
Banner World, there is a world named Adorned Appearance. The
buddha there is named Great Light of Transcendence.
Above this world, on the same level as the Sahā World, there is
a world named Everywhere Adorned with Vaiḍūrya Spheres. The
buddha there is named Sumeru Lamp.
In the highest region of this world system, there is world called
Ocean of Flower Banners. The buddha there is named Cloud of
Endless Transformations and Sublime Wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond that Mass of
Vajra Jewels Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean known as Decorated
Jewel Parapets. The world system is known as Outstanding Jewel
Banners.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Adorned with
Jeweled Banners. The world system is known as Displaying Every
Kind of Radiance.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Cloud of
Marvelous Jewels. The world system is known as Pervasively
Illuminating Light of All Kinds of Jewel Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Adorned with
Jewel Tree Blossoms. The world system is known as Interspersed
with Marvelous Floral Decorations.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Adorned with
Marvelous Bejeweled Robes. The world system is known as Ocean
of Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Jewel Tree
Summit. The world system is known as Cloud of Flaming Jewel
Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Manifesting
Light. The world system is known as Unimpeded Vajra Penetration.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Pervasive Lotus
Adornments. The world system is known as Boundless Shores of
Ocean Depths.

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
231
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Marvelous
Jewel Adornment. The world system is known as Everywhere
Revealing the Treasuries of Countries.
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as the
atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant ocean
closest to the ring of mountains is called Indestructible Ocean.
The world system is known as Lotus Field Inlaid with Wondrous
Wheels. Its essence consists of the sounds emanated by the pow­
ers of all buddhas. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a
world called Most Sublime Fragrance. The buddha there is named
Emanating Light Rays as Numerous as Countless Atoms.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numer­
ous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the
Vajra Banner World, there is a world named Inconceivably Many
Different Approaches to Adornment. The buddha there is named
Measureless Wisdom.
Above this world, on the same level as the Sahā World, there
is a world named Treasury of Wondrous Flowers Emanating Light
throughout the Ten Directions. The buddha there is named Cloud
of Flaming Light from the Eye of the Lion.
In the highest region of this world system, there is world called
Ocean Sound. The buddha there is named Water Heaven’s Gate of
Flaming Light.
Sons of the Buddha, the next fragrant ocean beyond that Jeweled
Parapet of the Celestial Ramparts Fragrant Ocean is a fragrant ocean
known as Glorious Radiance of the Wheel of Flaming Light. The
world system is known as Ineffably Many Different Adornments.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Jewel Dust
Road. The world system is known as Everywhere Entering Countless
Vortices.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Possessed
of Every Adornment. The world system is known as Pervasively
Radiant Jewel Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Net Spreading
Many Jewels. The world system is known as Deep and Dense Array.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Banner of
Wondrous Jewel Adornments. The world system is known as Sound
of Clear Knowledge of the Oceans of Worlds.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Pure Reflections
of the Solar Palace. The world system is known as Everywhere
Entering Indra’s Net.

232

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Exquisitely
Sublime Sound of Every Kind of Drum Music. The world system is
known as Perfectly Full in Uniform Rectitude.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as All Kinds of
Sublime Adornments. The world system is known as Cloud of Pure
and Dense Flaming Light.
The next fragrant ocean beyond that is known as Lamp of
Omnipresent Flaming Jewel Light. The world system is known as
Forms According to the Buddha’s Original Vows.
There are other fragrant oceans such as these as numerous as
the atoms in an ineffable number of buddha kṣetras. The fragrant
ocean closest to the ring of mountains is called Robe of Collected
Necklaces. The world system is known as Marvelous Conjured
Robes. Its essence consists of the voices of all buddhas of the three
periods of time. Within it, in the very lowest region, there is a fra­
grant ocean called Indra’s Flower Treasury. That world is called
Inducing Joyous Delight.94 It is surrounded by uniformly pure
worlds as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra. The buddha
there is named Solid Awakened Wisdom.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Vajra
Banner World, there is a world named Jewel Net Adornment. It is
surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms
in ten buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Radiance of
Measureless Joyous Delight.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in three buddha kṣetras, on the same level as the Sahā
World, there is a world named Jeweled Lotus Lion Throne. It is sur­
rounded by worlds as numerous as the atoms in thirteen buddha
kṣetras. The buddha there is named Supreme Purity Not Heard in
Vain.
Above this world, beyond a number of worlds as numerous as
the atoms in seven buddha kṣetras, in the highest region of this
world system, there is world called Jewel-Colored Dragon Light. It
is surrounded by uniformly pure worlds as numerous as the atoms
in twenty buddha kṣetras. The buddha there is named Brightness
Shining Everywhere throughout the Dharma Realm.
Sons of the Buddha, within fragrant oceans such as these as
numerous as the atoms in ten ineffables of buddha kṣetras, there exist
world systems as numerous as the atoms in ten ineffables of buddha
kṣetras. They all rest on a lotus adorned with a banner of sovereign
maṇi jewels displaying the physical forms of all bodhisattvas. Every

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
233
one of them has an uninterruptedly adorned border. Every one of
them emanates jewel-colored radiance. Every one of them is cov­
ered above by light clouds. Every one of them possesses its own
individual adornments. Every one of them is associated with differ­
ent sorts of kalpas. Every one of them has buddhas appearing in it.
Every one of them has the expounding of an ocean of the Dharma.
Every one of them is everywhere filled with beings. Every one of
them everywhere enters [every place] throughout the ten direc­
tions. And every one of them is supported by the empowerment of
the spiritual powers of all buddhas.
Within every one of these world systems, all the worlds take all
kinds of different adornments as the bases of their existence. They
are all interconnected in the formation of the web of worlds and
they are everywhere established in the various different aspects
constituting the Flower Treasury Adornment Ocean of Worlds.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning and assisted by the awe­
some power of the Buddha, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva then spoke
these verses:
The Flower Treasury ocean of worlds
is identical to and no different from the Dharma realm.
With adornments that are extremely pure,
it abides in empty space.
Within this ocean of worlds,
there exist an inconceivable number of kṣetra systems.
Each and every one of them is independent
and they each are free of mixing or disorder with the others.
In the Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds,
the kṣetra systems are well distributed,
unique in form, different in adornments,
and possessed of all sorts of diverse aspects.
The sounds of the transformations conjured by buddhas,
in their many different varieties, may form their essential substance.
Each, in ways befitting the power of his karmic deeds, sees
the marvelous adornments of these kṣetra systems.
[Some are] shaped like Mount Sumeru, a city wall, a net,
like whirlpools, wheels, spheres,
or like a vast blooming lotus flower
All of them mutually encircle each other.95
Or they may take the shape of a mountain banner, a tower,
a vortex, or a vajra.

234

The Flower Adornment Sutra
In ways such as these, there exist inconceivable
vast kṣetra systems.
[Based on] immense oceans, pearls, [made of] flaming radiance,
or inconceivable nets of light,
all such kṣetra systems as these
reside entirely within a lotus flower.
In each and every one of those kṣetra systems
there are an ineffable number of nets of light.
Within that light, there appear the many kṣetras
which everywhere pervade the ocean of the ten directions.
All the lands enter entirely
into all the adornments
present within all the kṣetra systems
where they are all endlessly seen.
The inconceivable kṣetra systems,
and the boundless worlds—
Their many different sorts of marvelously fine adornments
all arise through the powers of the Great Rishis.96
In all of the kṣetra world systems,
there exist an inconceivable number of worlds.
In some cases still forming, in some cases deteriorating,
and in some cases having already been completely destroyed.
Just as with the leaves within a forest,
there are those still growing even as others are falling,
so too, within kṣetra systems such as these,
worlds are being created and destroyed.
Just as, in dependence upon the trees in a grove,
there are many different kinds of fruits,
so too, in dependence on kṣetra systems such as these,
many different kinds of beings dwell.
Just as, where the types of seeds vary,
the fruits which are produced are distinctly different,
so too, because of differences in the power of their karmic deeds,
beings’ kṣetras are also not the same.
Just as, in the case of the mind king jewel,
in accordance with one’s mind one views many different colors,
so too, because a being’s mind is pure,
he will be able to see pure kṣetras.
Just as the great king of the dragons,
sends forth clouds which fill the sky,

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
235
in this same way, the power of the buddhas’ vows
produces all these lands.
Just as a conjurer, by resort to the use of spells,
is able to manifest many different kinds of phenomena,
so too, because of the power of the karma of beings,
there exist such inconceivable lands.
Just as the many paintings
were created by a master painter,
so too, all the kṣetras
were created by the master painter of the mind.
The differences in the bodies of each being
arise in accordance with the discriminations in their minds.
In this same way, of the many different kinds of kṣetras,
none of them have not arisen as a consequence of karma.
Just as when one sees the Master Guide,97
he may appear in many different forms.
So too, in accordance with the mental actions of beings,
what they see in the many kṣetras is also just this way.
The boundaries of all of the kṣetras
are draped all around with nets of lotus flowers.
Their various types of appearances are different
and their adornments are all pure.
All those nets of lotus flowers
are where the network of kṣetras is established.
It is among these various types of adorning phenomena
that the many different kinds of beings reside.
In some cases, there are kṣetras in which
it is dangerous, and the terrain is not level.
It is because of the afflictions of beings
that they see circumstances such as those.
Whether defiled or pure,
there are countless such kṣetra systems
which arise in accordance with the minds of beings
and which are sustained by the powers of the bodhisattvas.
In some cases, there are kṣetras in which
there is defilement or purity.
These arise due to the power of karmic actions
or are transformationally created by bodhisattvas.
There are kṣetras that emanate light,
which are composed of immaculate jewels,

236

The Flower Adornment Sutra
which have various kinds of marvelous adornments,
and which were purified by buddhas.
In every one of the kṣetra systems,
the kalpa-ending fires are inconceivable.
Although what appears then is the horror of destruction,
the places themselves always remain stable.
It is due to the power of beings’ karma
that there arise the many kṣetras
which rest upon wind spheres
or rest upon water spheres.
The dharmas of the worlds are of this very sort:
The various things are all seen differently,
and yet, in truth, none of them are produced at all,
nor are any of them destroyed.
It is by each and every thought of the mind,
that the countless kṣetras are produced.
It is through the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers
that one may see them as entirely pure and free of defilement.
There are kṣetras formed from dirt
whose substances are very hard and stiff
and which are dark and devoid of any illumination.
These are places in which those with evil karma reside.
There are kṣetras formed from vajra
which are defiled, which involve great anxiety and fear,
and in which suffering is abundant and happiness is rare.
These are where those of only meager merit reside.
Some of them are composed of iron
and some are made from copper
or from stone mountains which are dangerous and frightening.
These are full of those who committed the evils of karmic offenses.
There are kṣetras in which there are hells
where beings undergo sufferings from which there is no rescue,
where they constantly dwell in the midst of darkness,
or where they are burned by oceans of blazing flames.
Some others also have animals
with many different kinds of ugly physical forms
who, due to their own bad karmic actions,
always endure all kinds of suffering and anguish.
In some of them, one sees the realms of Yama
in which beings, driven along by burning hunger and thirst,

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
237
climb great mountains of fire
and endure all kinds of extremely intense sufferings.
In some cases, there are kṣetras
formed from combinations of the seven types of jewels
in which there are all different kinds of palaces.
These circumstances are acquired due to pure karmic actions.
You should contemplate those worlds
in which there are humans and devas.
Through the development of the fruits of pure karma,
they may experience happiness all the time.
There exist even within each and every pore,
an inconceivable number of koṭīs of kṣetras
in which there are all kinds of different adorned appearances
which, even so, are never cramped for space.
Due to the karma of each and every being,
the worlds are of countless types.
Within them, grasping and attachment arise,
by which their experience of suffering or happiness differs.
There are kṣetras composed of the many sorts of jewels
which always emanate boundless radiance
and which, with their vajra and marvelous lotuses,
contain adornments that are pure and free of defilement.
There are kṣetras whose essential substance is light
which exist in dependence upon a sphere of light,
which are gold colored, fragrant with sandalwood,
and have flaming light clouds everywhere producing illumination.
There are kṣetras consisting of a lunar orb
draped all about with fragrant robes
and resting within a single lotus flower
which is everywhere full of bodhisattvas.
There are kṣetras composed of the many kinds of jewels
whose colors and appearances are free of all defilement,
and which, just as with the net of Indra,
emanate light which forever brightly shines.
There are kṣetras whose essential substance is fragrance.
Some are flowers made of vajra
or are forms made of the reflected light of maṇi jewels.
Contemplating them, one beholds their extreme purity.
Some are inconceivable kṣetras
composed of flower wreaths

238

The Flower Adornment Sutra
that are entirely filled with transformation buddhas
and the pervasive radiance of bodhisattvas.
Some are pure kṣetras
entirely consisting of flowering trees
whose marvelous branches spread over a site of enlightenment
and shade it with clouds of maṇi jewels.
There are kṣetras illuminated by pure light,
composed of vajra flowers.
There are those consisting of sounds conjured by the Buddha
that are boundlessly arrayed in the form of a net.
There are kṣetras which have an appearance
like a bodhisattva’s crown composed of wondrous maṇi jewels.
There are those which assume a form like a throne
and which arise from conjured light.
Some consist of sandalwood powder
and some are formed from the light emitted from between the brows.
And in some cases, sounds emanated from the Buddha’s radiance
form these wondrous kṣetras.
There are those who see pure kṣetras
adorned with a single kind of light,
whereas some see them with many adornments.
These many different types are all extraordinarily marvelous.
Some of them use as their adornments
the marvelous things from ten lands,
whereas some take all of them from a thousand lands
to constitute their adornments.
In some cases, they use such things from a koṭī of kṣetras
to form the adornments for but a single land.
These many different appearances
then all appear there like reflected images.
There may be phenomena from an ineffable number of lands
which then serve to adorn but a single kṣetra.
Each and every one of these emanate light
which arises from the power of the Tathāgata’s vows.
In some cases, there are those lands
which have been purified by the power of vows
in which, within all their adornments,
one views the many oceans of kṣetras everywhere.
In the pure lands reached
by all who cultivate the vows of Samantabhadra,

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
239
the adornments in the kṣetras of the three periods of time
all appear there within it.
Sons of the Buddha, you should contemplate
the awesome spiritual powers within the kṣetra systems
in which one is enabled to see as if in a dream
all the lands of the future.
All the worlds throughout the ten directions,
including the oceans of lands throughout the past—
they all, within but a single kṣetra,
manifest their appearances as if conjured there.
All buddhas of the three periods of time
as well as their lands
may all be completely seen
within but a single kṣetra system.
Through the spiritual powers of all buddhas,
even within an atom, there appear the many lands.
Of their many different varieties, all are clearly seen
like reflections which have no actual reality.
In some cases, there are many kṣetras
whose form is like that of an immense ocean.
In some cases, they resemble Mount Sumeru.
Such worlds are inconceivably numerous.
There are kṣetras which are well established
whose form is like that of Indra’s net.
In some cases, they take the shape of a forest
entirely filled with buddhas.
In some cases, they assume the shape of a jeweled sphere.
In some cases they take the form of a lotus flower
or of an octagon replete with many forms of ornamentation.
In their many different types, they are all pure.
In some cases, they have a shape resembling a throne
or they have a triangular shape.
In some cases, they have the shape of a khārīka grain basket,
of a city’s walls, or of a Brahma Heaven king’s body.
In some cases, they may resemble the topknot of a celestial lord
or they appear in the shape of a half moon.
In some cases, they resemble a mountain of maṇi jewels
and in some cases, they appear as shaped like the sun.
In some instances, the shape of a world
is like that of whirlpool in a fragrant ocean.

240

The Flower Adornment Sutra
In some cases, they take the form of a sphere of light.
In the past, these were purified by the Buddha.
In some cases, they take the shape of a wheel
or they are shaped like a sacrificial platform.
In some cases, they resemble the Buddha’s hair mark,
the prominence on his crown, or his wide eyes.
In some cases, they resemble a buddha’s hand
or they resemble a vajra pestle.
Some resemble the shape of a mountain of flaming light
in which bodhisattvas are present everywhere.
In some instances, they are shaped like a lion
or resemble the shape of a seashell.
They assume all kinds of forms and appearances
and their essential natures are each different.
Even within a single kind of kṣetra system,
the shapes of the kṣetras are endless.
They all depend on the power of the buddhas’ vows
and mindful protection for their stable existence.
There are kṣetras which exist for a kalpa,
whereas some may exist for ten kalpas,
or even for more than a hundred thousand kalpas,
or for a period of kalpas as numerous as atoms in a land.
In some cases, during a single kalpa,
one may see a kṣetra pass through both formation and destruction,
whereas some may endure for measureless and innumerable kalpas,
or even up to inconceivably long periods of time.
In some cases, there are kṣetras in which a buddha is present,
or there may be kṣetras in which there is no buddha.
In some cases, there are those which have only a single buddha,
whereas some may have measurelessly many buddhas.
Wherever some land has no buddha,
within some other region’s worlds
there may be a buddha who then comes there by emanation
in order to show the many works they are able to accomplish,
whereupon he passes away from the heavens, sends down his spirit,
dwells in the womb, manifests birth,
vanquishes Māra, realizes right enlightenment,
and then turns the wheel of the unexcelled Dharma.
Adapting to the mental dispositions of beings,
he manifests many different kinds of appearances

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
241
in order to turn the wheel of the sublime Dharma,
in all cases responding to their faculties and aspirations.
In each and every buddha kṣetra,
a single buddha comes forth and appears in the world
where he may pass through even a thousand koṭīs of years
during which he expounds the unexcelled Dharma.
If beings do not qualify as vessels of Dharma,
they remain unable to see buddhas.
Wherever there are those whose minds delight in it,
they see them in every place.
Within every one of the kṣetras,
they have a buddha who appears in the world.
The number of buddhas present in all kṣetras
equal an inconceivably great number of koṭīs.
Each and every one of the buddhas herein
manifests measurelessly many spiritual emanations
which all pervade the Dharma realm,
training an ocean of beings.
There are kṣetras entirely devoid of light
which are dark and beset by an abundance of terror.
The sufferings they experience such as knives and swords
would cause anyone witnessing them to be horrified by their cruelty.
Some of them have the radiance of the heavens,
some have light emanated by palaces,
and some have the light of the sun and the moon.
This net of kṣetras is inconceivable.
There are kṣetras that themselves are radiant,
whereas, in some, it is the trees which emanate light.
Where they have never had the anguish of sufferings,
this is because of the power of the merit of those beings.
Some have light emanated by mountains,
some have light produced by maṇi jewels,
and some have illumination produced by the light of lamps.
In all such cases, this is due to the power of beings’ karma.
In some, there is the light of buddhas
which is filled with bodhisattvas.
There are those in which it is radiance emanated by lotus flowers
where the colors of their flaming light are extremely majestic and fine.
There are kṣetras illuminated by the light of flowers,
there are those illuminated by the glow of fragrant waters,

242

The Flower Adornment Sutra
and there are those illuminated by unguent scents or burning incense.
All of these exist due to the power of pure vows.
There are those which are illuminated by the light of clouds,
those which are illuminated by seashells made of maṇi jewels,
and those illuminated by the light of a buddha’s spiritual powers
which are able to emanate mind-pleasing sounds.
In some cases, they are illuminated by the light of jewels
and in some cases, they are illuminated by the flaming light of vajra.
Their pure sounds are able to produce distant tremors
and cause the places they reach to become free of the many sufferings.
In some, they have light produced by maṇi jewels,
in some, it is light produced by adornments,
and in some, it is light emanated by a site of enlightenment
that produces dazzling illumination within its congregation.
Buddhas emanate great radiance
filled with transformation buddhas.
Their light produces illumination that reaches everywhere
so that it pervades the entire Dharma realm.
There are extremely fearsome kṣetras
emanating howling screams and sounds of intense suffering.
Those sounds are extremely piteous and mournful
and they cause the hearer to be struck with revulsion and terror.
The hell and animal rebirth destinies
as well as Yama’s realm98
are worlds associated with the turbidities and unwholesome paths99
from which there constantly issue the sounds of woeful suffering.
In some of them, there are lands from which
there always issue delightful sounds
that please the mind and accord with the teachings.
It is due to pure karmic actions that these are reached.
In some of them, there are lands from which
one constantly hears the voice of Indra,
or else hears the voices of the Brahma Heaven devas,
or else hears the voices of the lords of all other such worlds.
In some instances, there are kṣetras
in which marvelous sounds emanate from clouds,
from oceans of jewels, or from maṇi jewel trees,
or in which musical sounds fill every place.
From within the light of the nimbus of all buddhas
there come forth endless transformationally conjured sounds

Chapter 5 — The Flower Treasury Ocean of Worlds
243
as well as the sublime voices of bodhisattvas
heard everywhere throughout the kṣetras of the ten directions.
From within inconceivably many lands,
there come the sounds of the pervasive turning of the Dharma wheel,
the sounds emanated from oceans of vows,
and the marvelous sounds of cultivation of the practices.
All buddhas of the three periods of time
come forth into the worlds
in which their names are all entirely present
and their sounds resound endlessly.
In some kṣetras, one hears
the sounds of all buddhas’ powers,
the grounds, the perfections, and also the immeasurable minds,
for dharmas such as these are all expounded there.
Through the power of the vows of Samantabhadra,
such wondrous sounds emanate throughout koṭīs of kṣetras
wherein his voice resounds like quaking thunder
and continues on for kalpas without end.
Within the pure lands, the Buddha
manifests the sounds of his sovereign mastery
so that, throughout the ten directions of the Dharma realm,
There are none who do not hear.
The End of Chapter Five

244

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 6
Vairocana
At that time, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva again addressed the
immense congregation, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, in the ancient past, back before a number of kal­
pas equal to the number of atoms in a world, and then additionally,
before twice that many past kalpas, there was an ocean of worlds
known as Pure Light of the Universal Gateway. Within this ocean
of worlds, there was a world known as Supreme Sound that took
an ocean of maṇi jewel flower nets as the basis of its existence and
that had a retinue of worlds as numerous as the atoms in Mount
Sumeru. It had the shape of a perfect sphere and its land possessed
countless adornments. It was surrounded by three hundred con­
centric rings of mountains forested with trees made from the many
kinds of jewels and it was covered by clouds of all the varieties of
jewels. It was brightly illuminated by immaculately pure light. Its
cities and palaces resembled Mount Sumeru. Clothing, drink, and
food spontaneously arrived in response to one’s wishes. Its kalpa
then was known as Various Adornments.
Sons of the Buddha, within that Supreme Sound World, there
was a fragrant ocean known as Pure Light. From within that ocean,
there emerged an immense floral Mount Sumeru known as Banner
Pervasively Adorned with Flaming Floral Light which was sur­
rounded by balustrades made of the ten types of jewels.
On that mountain, there was a great forest known as Circle of
Maṇi Jewel Flower Branches. Arrayed around it were countless
flower towers and countless bejeweled viewing terraces. There were
countless banners of wonderful fragrance and countless bejeweled
mountain banners with the most ultimate types of adornment.
Countless bejeweled puṇḍarīka flowers thrived in place after place.
It was surrounded by countless hanging nets of fragrant maṇi jewels
and lotus flowers. Musical sounds resounded with harmonious and
pleasing notes and incense clouds produced dazzling illumination.
Each of these was present in such countless numbers that it would
be impossible to fully describe them. There were hundreds of myri­
ads of koṭīs of nayutas of cities completely surrounding it in which
there dwelt many different kinds of beings.

246

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, to the east of this forest, there was a great
city known as Flaming Radiance ruled over by a human king, one
completely surrounded by hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas
of cities. It was composed of combinations of pure and marvelous
jewels and it was seven thousand yojanas in both length and width.
Its outer walls were made from the seven types of precious jewels.
The watchtowers and battlements for repelling invaders100 were all
lofty and beautiful.
It had seven concentric circles of bejeweled moats surround­
ing it which were full of fragrant waters. Spread about everywhere
as adornments were utpala lotus flowers, padma lotus flowers,
kumuda lotus flowers, and puṇḍarīka lotus flowers, all made of the
many kinds of jewels. Seven rings of jeweled tāla trees completely
encircled it. The palace and towers were all adorned with jewels.
All different kinds of marvelous net canopies hung above them.
Perfumes wafted about and scattered flowers decorated the areas
between them. It had a hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of gates,
all of them adorned with jewels. Before each of those gates, there
were forty-nine bejeweled śīla banners arranged in sequential and
orderly rows.
There were also a hundred thousand koṭīs of surrounding parks
and groves in all of which there were all different kinds of various
types of incense and the fragrance of maṇi jewel trees which wafted
all about and pervaded every place. The many species of birds sang
in harmony, delighting those who heard them.
Of the people who dwelt within this great city, none had not
already completely developed the karmic reward of the psycho-
physical powers by which they ascended into space to come and
go, traveling in the same way as the devas. Whatever their minds
wished for arrived in response to their thoughts.
South of that city there was a city of the devas known as Adorned
with Tree Blossoms. Circling around to the next city to its right, there
was a great city of the dragons known as Ultimate. Next, there was
a city of the yakṣas known as Supremely Marvelous Vajra Banner.
Next, there was a city of the gandharvas known as Wondrous Palace.
Next was a city of the asuras known as Jeweled Sphere. Next was a
city of the garuḍas known as Adorned with Marvelous Jewels. Next
was a city of kiṃnaras known as Sporting in Bliss. Next was a city
of the mahoragas known as Vajra Banner. And next was a city of the
Brahma Heaven King named All Kinds of Marvelous Adornments.
There were a hundred myriads of koṭīs of other cities such as
these. Every one of these cities had a hundred thousand koṭīs of

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
247
nayutas of towers surrounding it and every one of them had count­
less adornments.
Sons of the Buddha, within this Circle of Maṇi Jewel Flower
Branches Forest, there was a site of enlightenment known as
Pervasively Illuminating Jeweled Flowers. It was adorned with
many large jewels spread all about. There were rings of maṇi jewel
flowers that were everywhere in full bloom. It was lit up with fra­
grant lamps, the light from which shone with the colors of the many
types of jewels. It was covered with clouds of flaming radiance and
nets of light produced illumination everywhere. All of these adorn­
ments were forever producing marvelous jewels and, in all of the
music, there was the constant playing of elegant sounds. Sovereign
maṇi jewels displayed the images of bodhisattvas’ bodies. All differ­
ent kinds of marvelous flowers were arrayed everywhere through­
out the ten directions.
Directly in front of that site of enlightenment, there was a great
ocean known as Fragrant Maṇi Jewel Vajra from which there
emerged an immense lotus flower known as Ring of Flaming
Flower Stamens. That flower was a hundred koṭīs of yojanas wide
and its stem, petals, stamens, and seed pod were all made of mar­
velous jewels. It was surrounded by ten ineffables101 of hundreds of
koṭīs of yojanas of lotus flowers. It always emanated light and con­
stantly emitted wonderful sounds which completely pervaded the
ten directions.
Sons of the Buddha, at the very beginning of the kalpa, that
Supreme Sound World had tathāgatas as numerous as the atoms in
ten Mount Sumerus who appeared in the world. The first of those
buddhas was named Supreme Cloud on the Sumeru Mountain of
All Meritorious Qualities Buddha.
Sons of the Buddha, you should know that, a hundred years
before that buddha was about to appear, all the adornments in this
great Circle of Maṇi Jewel Flower Branches Forest became entirely
purified. That is to say:
Inconceivable clouds of flaming jewel light emerged;
They emanated sounds in praise of the Buddha’s meritorious
qualities;
They sent forth the sounds of innumerable buddhas’ voices;
They spread forth nets of light which completely covered the
regions of the ten directions;
The palaces and towers illuminated each other with dazzling
light;

248

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The light of jeweled flowers leapt up and gathered together in
clouds;
These in turn resounded with wonderful voices speaking of the
vast roots of goodness arising from the actions of all beings in
previous lives;
They uttered the names of all buddhas of the three periods of
time, speaking of the ultimate path of conduct and vows culti­
vated by all bodhisattvas; and
They recited many different phrases uttered by the Tathāgatas
when turning the wheel of the wonderful Dharma.
There appeared signs of adornment such as these which revealed
that the Tathāgata was about to come into the world. Because all the
kings in that world saw these signs, their roots of goodness ripened
and they all wished to see the Buddha, whereupon they came to the
site of enlightenment.
At that time, Supreme Cloud on the Sumeru Mountain of All
Meritorious Qualities Buddha suddenly appeared in the immense
lotus flower at his site of enlightenment. His body was present
everywhere and commensurate in scope with the true Dharma
realm. He manifested birth in all buddha kṣetras and all those sites
of enlightenment came to where he was.102 His boundless and mar­
velous physical form was so completely pure that nothing in any
world could outshine its brilliance. It possessed the many precious
signs, every one of which was clearly visible. His image appeared
in all the palaces so that all beings were able to see him with their
own eyes. Boundlessly many transformation buddhas came forth
from his body and light of many different colors completely filled
the Dharma realm.
Just as, in the midst of this Pure Light Fragrant Ocean, his body
appeared sitting on its throne in this Circle of Maṇi Jewel Flower
Branches Forest on the summit of the Banner Adorned with Flaming
Floral Light Mount Sumeru, so too did his body also manifest as sit­
ting at the summit of all the sixty-eight thousand koṭīs of Mount
Sumerus throughout that Supreme Sound World.
At that time, that buddha then emanated a great light from
between his brows. That light known as Sound Initiating All Roots
of Goodness had a retinue of light rays as numerous as the atoms
in ten buddha kṣetras. It completely filled all lands throughout the
ten directions and, wherever there were beings capable of being
trained who were touched by this light, they awakened on their
own, the heat of their delusions was extinguished, the nets of their
hindrances were all sliced away, their mountains of obstacles were

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
249
all demolished, their turbidity from defilements was all purified,
they developed great resolute faith, they produced supreme roots
of goodness, they forever abandoned all fear of encountering the
difficulties,103 they entirely extinguished all physical and mental
suffering and anguish, they brought forth the resolve to see the
Buddha, and they progressed toward all-knowledge.
At that time, due to having awakened by experiencing the touch
of the Buddha’s light, all the leaders of the world together with their
retinues numbering in the countless hundreds of thousands all
then went forth to visit the Buddha and prostrated in reverence at
his feet.
Sons of the Buddha, within that great city of Flaming Radiance,
there was a king named Joyously Beheld Fine Wisdom who was the
leader of a hundred myriads of koṭīs of nayutas of cities, whose thirty-
seven thousand wives and courtesans were headed by Meritorious
Auspiciousness, and whose five hundred princes were headed by
Light of Great Power. Prince Light of Great Power himself had ten
thousand wives headed by Marvelous Sight.
At that time, after Prince Light of Great Power had seen the light
of the Buddha, due to the power of roots of goodness cultivated
in the past, he immediately realized the attainment of ten Dharma
gateways. What were those ten? They were as follows:
He realized the attainment of the samādhi of all buddhas’ sphere
of meritorious qualities;
He realized the attainment of the dhāraṇī of the Universal Gateway
into the Dharma of all Buddhas;
He realized the attainment of the vast treasury of skillful means
of the prajñā pāramitā;
He realized the attainment of the great adornment of the great
kindness by which one trains all beings;
He realized the attainment of the universal cloud-like sound of
the great compassion;
He realized the attainment of the great sympathetic joy by which,
with supreme resolve, one produces boundless meritorious
qualities;
He realized the attainment of the great equanimity by which one
awakens to the true character of all dharmas;
He realized the attainment of the great spiritual superknowledges
as a treasury of vast impartially implemented skillful means;
He realized the attainment of the great vows that increase the
power of resolute faith; and

250

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He realized the attainment of the gateway of eloquence that every­
where enters the light of all-knowledge.
At that time, having acquired the light of dharmas such as these,
Prince Light of Great Power, assisted by the awesome power of the
Buddha, surveyed that immense congregation and then spoke these
verses:
As the Bhagavat sits in the site of enlightenment,
his pure great radiance
is like the rising of a thousand suns
everywhere illuminating the realms of space.
After countless thousands of koṭīs of kalpas,
the Master Guide only then appears.
The Buddha now comes forth into the world,
where he is looked up to and served by all.
Contemplate within the light of the Buddha
the inconceivably many transformation buddhas
who, within all the palaces,
abide quiescently in meditative absorption.
Contemplate the Buddha’s spiritual superknowledges
by which his pores emanate clouds of flaming light,
producing dazzling illumination of the world
with his endless light.
You should contemplate the body of the Buddha,
its net of light of the utmost purity,
and his manifesting of forms equal to those of all others
which everywhere fill the ten directions.
His marvelous voice pervades the world,
causing all who hear it to feel delighted.
It accords with the languages of all beings
as it praises the meritorious qualities of the buddhas.
All beings illuminated by the light of the Bhagavat
are all thus caused to be happy.
Wherever there is suffering, it is entirely extinguished,
and their minds then feel great joyous delight.
Contemplate the congregation of bodhisattvas
who have come from the ten directions to assemble here.
They all emanate clouds of maṇi jewels
which proclaim their praises of the buddhas.
The site of enlightenment emanates wondrous sounds.
Its sounds which are extremely deep and far-reaching

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
251
are able to extinguish the suffering of beings.
This is the spiritual power of the Buddha.
Everyone there is reverential.
Their minds feel great joyous delight.
Together in the presence of the Bhagavat,
they gaze up in admiration at the Dharma King.
Sons of the Buddha, when that Prince Light of Great Power uttered
these verses, due to the spiritual powers of the Buddha, his voice
everywhere pervaded that Supreme Sound World. At that time,
after King Joyously Beheld Fine Wisdom had heard these verses,
his mind was filled with great joy, whereupon he contemplated his
retinue and spoke these verses:
You should swiftly call together
the entire royal assembly,
the princes, the chief ministers,
the officials of the cities and towns, and the rest.
Inform everyone in all the cities
that they should quickly beat the great drums
and assemble all the people
to all go forth and see the Buddha.
At every one of the crossroads,
one should ring the jeweled bells
so that all the wives, the children, and their retainers
will all go together to see the Tathāgata.
It would be fitting to see to completely cleansing
all the cities and their outlying precincts,
everywhere setting up supremely marvelous banners
decorated with maṇi jewels.
Raising up jewel curtains, hanging arrays of many nets,
sending forth sounds of singers like spreading clouds,
creating complete adornments even across the sky,
cause place after place to be completely filled with these.
See that the roads are all cleansed
and everywhere showered with marvelous robes.
Adorn and ride forth in your jeweled carriages
and come together with me to see the Buddha.
Each in accordance with their own resources—
everywhere rain down adornments
which all, spreading like clouds,
will completely fill the skies.

252

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Fragrant flaming light lotus flower canopies,
necklaces made of half-moon jewels,
as well as countless marvelous robes—
You should rain down all such things as these.
Supremely marvelous maṇi jewel wheels
from Mount Sumeru and the fragrant oceans
as well as pure sandalwood incense
should all be rained down so that they fill the skies.
Garlands of flowers made of the many kinds of jewels,
adornments which are immaculately pure,
as well as maṇi jewel lamps—
enable them all to remain suspended in the air.
Take all of these to the Buddha
with minds filled with joyous delight,
and, together with wives, children, and retainers,
go to see the World Honored One.
At that time, King Joyously Beheld Fine Wisdom left the city of
Flaming Radiance together with and surrounded by thirty-seven
thousand wives and consorts headed by Meritorious Auspiciousness,
the five hundred princes headed by Light of Great Power, sixty thou­
sand great officials headed by one who was named Wisdom Power,
and a congregation of other such followers as these which num­
bered seventy-seven hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas. By resort to
the King’s powers, that entire immense congregation ascended into
the sky along with all those offering gifts which everywhere filled
the sky, whereupon they all went to where the Buddha was, bowed
down in reverence at the Buddha’s feet, and then sat off to one side.
There was also the deva king, Fine Transformation Banner, from
the city known as Wondrous Blossoms, together with a retinue of
ten koṭīs of nayutas of followers.
There was also the dragon king, Pure Light, from the city known
as Ultimate Grandeur, together with a retinue of twenty-five koṭīs of
followers.
There was also the yakṣa king, Courageous Stalwart, from the
city known as Supreme Vajra Banner, together with a retinue of
seventy-seven koṭīs of followers.
There was also the gandharva king, Joyous Vision, from the city
known as Immaculate, together with a retinue of ninety-seven koṭīs
of followers.
There was also the asura king, Contemplator of Pure Form, from
the city known as Wondrous Wheel, together with a retinue of fifty-
eight koṭīs of followers.

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
253
There was also the garuḍa king, Ten Powers Conduct, from the
city known as Marvelous Adornment, together with a retinue of
ninety-nine thousand followers.
There was also the kiṃnara king, Vajra Virtue, from the city
known as Sporting in Bliss, together with a retinue of eighteen koṭīs
of followers.
There was also the mahoraga king, Precious Praise Banner, from
the city known as Vajra Banner, together with a retinue of three
hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of followers.
There was also the Brahma Heaven king, Most Supreme, from
the city known as Pure Marvelous Adornments, together with a
retinue of eighteen koṭīs of followers.
All of the kings from the other hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of
nayutas of such great cities went together with their retinues to visit
Supreme Cloud on the Sumeru [Mountain]104 of All Meritorious
Qualities Tathāgata where he dwelt, bowed down in reverence at
the Buddha’s feet, and then sat off to one side.
At that time, because that tathāgata wished to train beings, in
the midst of that oceanic congregation at the site of enlightenment,
he taught the Sutra of the Comprehensively Collected Dharma of
Sovereign Mastery of All Buddhas of the Three Periods of Time,
one that itself had a retinue of sutras as numerous as the atoms in a
world. By adapting to the minds of beings as he did so, he enabled
them all to thus gain benefit from this.
At this time, having heard this Dharma, Light of Great Power
Bodhisattva then acquired the light of the ocean of Dharma that
Supreme Cloud on the Sumeru [Mountain] of All Meritorious
Qualities Buddha had collected in his previous lives, namely:
The wisdom light of the “identity of all Dharma collections”
samādhi;
The wisdom light [of the knowledge that] all dharmas enter and
abide in the very first instance of the resolve to attain bodhi;
The wisdom light of the pure eye [that sees] the treasury of light
which everywhere pervades the ten directions of the Dharma
realm;
The wisdom light that contemplates the ocean of great vows
within the Dharma of all buddhas;
The wisdom light [that knows] the pure practices by which one
enters the boundless ocean of meritorious qualities;
The wisdom light [that knows] the treasury of immense power
and swiftness with which one progresses toward irreversibility
[on the path];

254

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The wisdom light [that knows] the Dharma realm’s measureless
powers of transformation by which one achieves emancipation
from the wheel [of cyclic existence];
The wisdom light by which one decisively enters the ocean of
measureless perfectly fulfilled meritorious qualities;
The wisdom light that completely knows the ocean of perfected
adornments accomplished through all buddhas’ decisive
understanding;
The wisdom light that completely knows the ocean of spiritual
superknowledges by which the Dharma realm’s boundlessly
many buddhas appear directly before all beings; and
The wisdom light by which one completely knows the dharmas of
all buddhas’ powers and fearlessnesses.
At that time, after having acquired countless kinds of wisdom light
such as these, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Light
of Great Power Bodhisattva spoke these verses:
I heard the wondrous Dharma of the Buddha
and thus acquired the light of wisdom.
Because of this, I see the deeds
that the Bhagavat has done in the past.
All those places in which he took birth,
his different names and bodies,
as well as his offerings made to the buddhas—
I see all matters such as these.
In the past, in the presence of the buddhas,
he served them all,
and cultivated for countless kalpas
as he purified an ocean of kṣetras.
He gave up his own body
a boundlessly vast number of times
and cultivated the most superior practices
as he purified an ocean of kṣetras.
His ears, nose, head, hands, and feet,
as well as his palaces—
He relinquished these countless times
as he purified an ocean of kṣetras.
He was able in each and every kṣetra
and throughout inconceivably many koṭīs of kalpas
to cultivate the practices leading to bodhi
as he purified an ocean of kṣetras.

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
255
By the power of the great vows of Samantabhadra,
within the ocean of all buddhas,
he cultivated countless practices
as he purified an ocean of kṣetras.
Just as it is because of the sunlight’s illumination
that one also sees the orb of the sun itself,
so too, by resort to the Buddha’s light of wisdom,
I see that path that the Buddha himself has traveled.
I see the buddha’s ocean of kṣetras,
his pure and grand radiance,
and his quiescent realization of bodhi
everywhere throughout the entire Dharma realm.
Just like the Bhagavat, I shall
engage in the vast purification of oceans of kṣetras, and,
with the assistance of the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers,
I shall cultivate the practices that lead to bodhi.
Sons of the Buddha, at that time, because he saw Supreme Cloud
on the Sumeru Mouanuttarantain of Meritorious Qualities Buddha,
served him, and made offerings to him, the mind of Light of Great
Power Bodhisattva attained awakening in the presence of the
Tathāgata. Then, for the sake of the entire world: he revealed the
Tathāgata’s ocean of past practices; he revealed the skillful means
used in his past bodhisattva practices; he revealed the ocean of all
buddhas’ meritorious qualities; he revealed the pure wisdom by
which one everywhere enters the Dharma realm; he revealed the
sovereign powers used in the realization of buddhahood in all sites
of enlightenment; he revealed the Buddha’s powers, fearlessnesses,
and nondiscriminating wisdom;105 he revealed the pervasively
manifested appearances of the Tathāgata’s bodies;106 he revealed the
Buddha’s inconceivable spiritual transformations; he revealed the
adornments of countless pure buddha lands; and he revealed all
the conduct and vows of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva. In so doing,
he enabled beings as numerous as the atoms in Mount Sumeru
to resolve to attain bodhi and enabled beings as numerous as the
atoms in a buddha kṣetra to perfect the pure lands of the tathāgatas.
At that time, for the sake of Light of Great Power Bodhisattva,
Supreme Cloud on the Sumeru Mountain of All Meritorious
Qualities Buddha spoke these verses:
Good indeed, O Light of Great Power,
you who are widely renowned as a treasury of merit.
In order to benefit beings,
you have set out on the path to bodhi.

256

The Flower Adornment Sutra
You have attained the light of wisdom
which extends everywhere throughout the Dharma realm.
Being vast in both merit and wisdom,
you are bound to acquire an ocean of deep wisdom.
Having cultivated in but a single kṣetra
throughout kalpas as numerous as a kṣetra’s atoms,
as you have observed with me,
one then becomes bound to attain wisdom such as this.
It is not the case that those of inferior practice
could ever come to know these skillful means.
Only if one acquires the power of great vigor
might one then become able to purify an ocean of kṣetras.
If in each and every atom,
one were to cultivate for countless kalpas,
only such a person as this would then be able to succeed
in purifying all buddha kṣetras.
One who can pass through an ocean of kalpas in cyclic existence
for the sake of each and every being
without his mind growing weary and slackening
is bound to become the world’s Master Guide.
One who makes offerings to each and every buddha
even to the exhaustion of the bounds of the future
with a mind free of even a moment’s weariness
is bound to succeed in the unsurpassable path.
The buddhas of the three periods of time
shall together assist the fulfillment of your vows
so that you will then personally abide
within the congregations of all buddhas.
The vows of all tathāgatas
are boundless.
Those with a penetrating comprehension of great wisdom
are able to know these skillful means.
Great Light, because you have made offerings to me,
you therefore attained great power
by which you enable beings as numerous as atoms
to become ripened in their progression toward bodhi.
The greatly renowned bodhisattvas
who cultivate the practices of Samantabhadra
and adorn an ocean of buddha kṣetras
are everywhere present throughout the Dharma realm.

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
257
Sons of the Buddha, you should all realize that, subsumed within
that [Various] Great Adornments Kalpa,107 there were small kal­
pas as numerous as a Ganges’ sands. The life span of the people
then was two small kalpas. Sons of the Buddha, the life span of
that Supreme Cloud on the Sumeru [Mountain] of All Meritorious
Qualities Buddha was fifty koṭīs of years. After that buddha passed
into nirvāṇa, a buddha came forth into the world named King
Adorned with the Pāramitās’ Eye of Goodness who also achieved
right enlightenment there within that great Circle of Maṇi Jewel
Flower Branches Forest.
At that time, the youth, Light of Great Power, saw that tathāgata
attain the universal and right enlightenment and manifest the
power of his spiritual superknowledges, whereupon:
He attained the mindfulness-of-the-buddha samādhi known as
“gateway to the boundless oceanic treasury”;
He attained a dhāraṇī known as “great wisdom power’s Dharma
depths”;
He immediately attained the great kindness known as “every­
where adapting to beings in training and liberating them”;
He immediately attained the great compassion known as “the
cloud that everywhere covers all realms”;
He immediately attained the great sympathetic joy known as
“treasury of the awesome power of all buddhas’ ocean of meri­
torious qualities”;
He immediately attained the great equanimity known as “the
identity and purity of the nature of dharmas and empty space”;
He immediately attained the prajñā pāramitā known as “the inher­
ent stainlessness of the pure body of the Dharma realm”;
He immediately attained the spiritual superknowledge known as
“the universally adapting appearance of unimpeded radiance”;
He immediately attained the eloquence known as “skillful pen­
etration of the depths of stainlessness”; and
He immediately attained the light of wisdom known as “the pure
treasury of all dharmas of the Buddha.”
There were ten thousand Dharma gateways such as these. He
attained a penetrating comprehension of them all.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, that
youth, Light of Great Power, spoke these verses for his entire reti­
nue, saying:
Even in an inconceivable number of kalpas, it is difficult to meet
even one time the enlightened teacher who is a guide for the world.

258

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The beings of this land have received an abundance of good fortune,
for now they are able to see a second buddha.
The Buddha’s body everywhere emanates the great radiance
of the boundless and utmost purity of his physical marks.
Like a cloud, it fills up all lands
and everywhere praises the meritorious qualities of the buddhas.108
Those illuminated by that light are all filled with joyous delight
and, wherever beings are beset by suffering, it is all extinguished.
Each is moved to feel reverence and produce thoughts of kindness.
These are all masterful functions brought about by the Tathāgata.
He sends forth clouds of inconceivably many transformations
which, emanating nets of infinitely varicolored radiance,
fill up all the lands throughout the ten directions.
These are manifested by the Buddha’s spiritual superknowledges.
From each and every pore, there appear clouds of light
which pervade all of space and send forth a great sound.
Of all the nether-world regions, none are not thus illuminated,
whereupon the many sufferings of the hells are all extinguished.
The Tathāgata’s wondrous voice pervades the ten directions
where it uses all languages to expound the Dharma,
adapting to beings’ strengths arising from their past lives’ goodness.
These are functions of the Great Master’s spiritual transformations.
The Buddha comes forth and appears
in all the measureless and boundless oceans of great congregations,
and everywhere turns the wheel of the endless and sublime Dharma,
thereby bringing about the training of all beings.
The boundless power of the Buddha’s spiritual superknowledges
manifests within all the kṣetras
where the Well Gone One of unimpeded wisdom such as this
realizes right enlightenment in order to benefit beings.
You should all be moved to thoughts of joyous delight
and be filled with exultation, happiness, and extreme reverence.
I shall go together with you to meet him.
If one sees the Tathāgata, his many sufferings will all cease.
Bring forth the resolve dedicated to progressing toward bodhi,
and bear all beings in mind with kindness.
If everyone abides in the vast vows of Samantabhadra,
we shall acquire sovereign mastery just as has the Dharma King.
Sons of the Buddha, when the youth, Light of Great Power, spoke
these verses, due to the spiritual power of the Buddha, his voice

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
259
became so unimpeded that, in all worlds, everyone was able to hear
it, whereupon countless beings resolved to attain bodhi.
At that time, Prince Light of Great Power, together with his par­
ents and their retinues, surrounded by countless hundreds of thou­
sands of koṭīs of nayutas of beings, with cloud-like jeweled canopies
everywhere filling the sky, all went together to visit King Adorned
with the Pāramitās’ Eye of Goodness Tathāgata. That buddha then
taught them the Sutra on the Pure Adornment of the Dharma
Realm’s Essential Nature, one with a retinue of sutras as numerous
as the atoms in an ocean of worlds. Having heard the teaching of
that scripture, that entire great congregation then:
Attained a kind of pure knowledge known as “the penetration of
all pure skillful means”;
Attained a ground known as “stainless light”;
Attained a cycle of pāramitās known as “revealing the adornments
loved by the entire world”;
Attained a cycle of increasingly vast practices known as “every­
where entering all kṣetras, boundless radiance, and pure
views”;109
Attained a cycle of progressive practices known as “radiant ban­
ner of a cloud of stainless merit”;
Attained a cycle of progressively penetrated realizations known
as “vast radiance of the ocean of all dharmas”;
Attained ever more profound preparatory practices known as
“adornment with great wisdom”;
Attained an ocean of crown-anointing wisdom known as “effort­
less cultivation of the ultimate sublime vision”;
Attained a complete manifestation of vast radiance known as
“universal illumination of the reflected light emanating from
the Tathāgata’s signs of an ocean of meritorious qualities”; and
Attained the pure wisdom which produces the power of vows
known as “treasury of the power of measureless vows and reso­
lute faith.”
At that time, that buddha spoke verses for Light of Great Power
Bodhisattva, saying:
Good Indeed, O Ocean of Meritorious Qualities and Wisdom.
Having resolved to progress toward the great bodhi,
you are bound to attain the inconceivable realm of buddhahood
and become a place of refuge for beings everywhere.
You have already brought forth an ocean of great wisdom
and are thus able to thoroughly understand all dharmas.

260

The Flower Adornment Sutra
You are bound to use inconceivably marvelous skillful means
to enter the Buddha’s endless sphere of action.
You have already seen all buddhas’ cloud of meritorious qualities
and have already entered the ground of inexhaustible wisdom.
As for the ocean of pāramitās and skillful means,
you, O One of Great Renown, are bound to completely fulfill them.
You have already acquired the skillful means and dhāraṇī gateways
as well as the gateway of inexhaustible eloquence.
Having cultivated all the different kinds of conduct and vows,
you are bound to perfect the incomparably great wisdom.
You have already brought forth an ocean of vows
and you have already entered an ocean of samādhis.
You are bound to perfect the various kinds of great spiritual powers
as well as all the inconceivable dharmas of the Buddha.
You have reached the very ends of the inconceivable Dharma realm
and have already purified the vast and deep resolve.
Going everywhere to see all buddhas of the ten directions,
you engage in the pure adornment of the ocean of the many kṣetras.
You have already entered my bodhi practices
and the ocean of original deeds and expedients practiced in the past.
Just as I cultivated and purified them,
you have awakened to all such marvelous practices as these.
In each and every one of countless kṣetras,
I presented all different sorts of offerings to an ocean of buddhas,
cultivating just as they did the result which was then attained.
You yourself have witnessed all adornments such as these.
It is through the cultivation of pure practices in all kṣetras
throughout a vast and endless ocean of kalpas,
doing so with solid and inconceivable vows,
that you are bound to gain these spiritual powers of the Tathāgata.
Through making offerings to all buddhas without exception
and adorning the lands until they are all purified
while cultivating the marvelous practices in every kalpa,
you are bound to perfect the buddhas’ great meritorious qualities.
Sons of the Buddha, after King Adorned with the Pāramitās’ Eye
of Goodness Tathāgata entered nirvāṇa, King Joyously Beheld Fine
Wisdom soon afterward also passed on from that world. The youth,
Light of Great Power, then took on the position of wheel-turning
king. Then, within that Circle of Maṇi Jewel Flower Branches Forest,

Chapter 6 — Vairocana
261
a third tathāgata appeared in the world, one by the name of Ocean of
Supreme Meritorious Qualities.
At that time, having observed the signs of that tathāgata’s realiza­
tion of buddhahood, Light of Great Power Wheel-turning King then
went to where that buddha was, accompanied by his retinue, four
divisions of soldiers, and all the citizens of the cities and villages, all
of whom brought along the seven kinds of jewels. They then offered
up to that buddha an immense tower adorned with every kind of
fragrant maṇi jewel.
At that time, in that very forest, that tathāgata taught the Sutra on
the Radiant Practices of the Bodhisattva’s Universal Eye, one that had
a retinue of sutras as numerous as the atoms in a world. After hear­
ing this Dharma, Light of Great Power Bodhisattva then acquired
a samādhi known as Universal Light of Great Merit. Because he
acquired this samādhi, he was then able to completely know the
ocean of meritorious and non-meritorious aspects of all bodhisat­
tvas and all beings throughout the past, present, and future.
At that time, that buddha spoke verses for Light of Great Power
Bodhisattva, saying:
It is good indeed, meritorious Light of Great Power,
that you and the others have all come here to visit me,
and that, due to sympathetic mindfulness of the ocean of all beings,
you have produced the great vow’s resolve to attain supreme bodhi.
For the sake of all suffering beings,
you raised the mind of great compassion to enable their liberation
and thus shall become a refuge for the many deluded beings.
This is what constitutes the bodhisattva’s practice of skillful means.
Wherever there is a bodhisattva able to remain steadfast
in cultivating supreme practices without weariness or indolence
with the most supreme and superior unimpeded understanding,
he is bound to acquire sublime wisdom such as this.
O Light of Merit, Banner of Merit,
Abode of Merit, and Ocean of Merit—
All the vows of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva
are such that you, O Great Light, are able to enter them.
Because of these vast vows, you will be able
to enter the inconceivable ocean of all buddhas.
The ocean of merit of all buddhas is boundless.
With sublime understanding, you will be able to see it all.
In the lands throughout the ten directions,
you will see all of the measurelessly and boundlessly many buddhas.

262

The Flower Adornment Sutra
As for the ocean of all past practices of those buddhas,
you will completely see all matters such as these.
Wherever there are those who dwell in this ocean of skillful means,
they are certainly bound to enter the wisdom grounds.
This is to accord with all buddhas in one’s training.
One such as this is definitely bound to realize all-knowledge.
In the ocean of all kṣetras, you cultivate all practices
throughout an ocean of kalpas as numerous as atoms.
Having thus trained in all the practices of all the tathāgatas,
you are bound then to attain the realization of buddhahood.
Just as you have observed throughout the ten directions
the most ultimate purification of the ocean of all kṣetras,
so too shall be the purification of your own kṣetra,
This is what those of boundless vows are bound then to attain.
All those in the ocean of this site of enlightenment’s congregation,
having heard your vows, are now delighted.
They all enter into the vast vehicle of Samantabhadra
and resolve to dedicate this to their progression toward bodhi.
Thus, into each and every one of the boundlessly many lands,
they shall all enter and cultivate throughout an ocean of kalpas,
and, by the power of vows, they will be able to perfectly fulfill
all of the practices of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva.
Sons of the Buddha, yet another buddha came forth and appeared
within that Circle of Maṇi Jewel Flower Branches Forest, one named
Universally Famous Banner of the Eye of the Lotus. During that
era, Light of Great Power reached the end of this life there and was
reborn atop Mount Sumeru in the celestial city known as Quiescent
Jeweled Palace. There he became a great heavenly king known as
Banner of Stainless Merit. He went with a congregation of devas
to visit that Buddha and presented him with an offering of a cloud
that rained down bejeweled flowers.
At that time, that tathāgata spoke for their sakes the Pervasive
Illumination of the Universal Gateway of Vast Skillful Means Sutra,
one that had a retinue of sutras as numerous as the atoms in an
ocean of worlds. Having heard this sutra, that congregation of
devas then acquired a samādhi known as “treasury of delight in the
universal gateway.” Through the power of that samādhi, they were
then able to enter the ocean of the true character of all dharmas.
Having acquired this benefit, they then departed from that site of
enlightenment and returned to their original place.
The End of Chapter Six

Chapter 7
The Names of the Tathāgata
At that time, the Bhagavat was in the state of Magadha where he was
abiding in accordance with the araṇya dharma110 at the site of enlight­
enment. Having just attained the right enlightenment, he sat in the
Hall of Universal Radiance on the lotus flower dais lion throne where:
His marvelous awakening was in all respects completely fulfilled;
He had forever cut off the two types of actions;111
He had acquired the penetrating comprehension of the dharma of
signlessness;112
He had come to dwell where buddhas dwell;
He had attained the equality of the buddhas;113
He had reached the station free of obstacles;
He had attained the Dharma that cannot be overturned;114
He had become unimpeded in his actions;
He had established what is inconceivable; and
He had attained the universal vision of the three periods of time.
He dwelt together with bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras, none of whom had not already reached the stage of
having but one more birth.115 They had all come from other regions to
assemble there. They all skillfully contemplated:
All realms of beings;
The Dharma realm;
The realms of the world;
The realm of nirvāṇa;
The rewards and retributions of all actions;
The sequences involved in actions of the mind;
The meanings of all literary compositions;
The mundane and the supramundane;
The conditioned and the unconditioned; and
The past, the present, and the future.
At that time, those bodhisattvas had this thought:
“If the Bhagavat were to see fit to have pity on us, we pray that,
in accordance with our wishes, he would reveal and explain to us
the buddha kṣetras, the station of buddhahood, the adornment of
the buddha kṣetras, the nature of the dharmas of buddhahood, the

Chapter 7 — The Names of the Tathāgata
264
purification of the buddha kṣetras, the Dharma taught by the bud­
dhas, the essential nature of the buddha kṣetras, the awesome virtue
of the buddhas, the establishment of the buddha kṣetras, and the
great bodhi of the buddhas.
Just as all buddhas, the bhagavats, in all worlds throughout the
ten directions, to develop all bodhisattvas, to prevent the severance
of the tathāgatas’ lineages, to rescue all beings, to cause all beings to
forever abandon all afflictions, to enable them to completely know
all the practices, to expound on all dharmas, to cause the cleans­
ing of all defilements, to forever sever the net of all doubts, to
uproot all wants, and to destroy the bases of craving-based attach­
ments—they then explained the ten dwellings, the ten practices, the
ten dedications, the ten treasuries, the ten grounds, the ten vows,
the ten meditative absorptions, the ten superknowledges, and the
ten summits, while also teaching the ground of the Tathāgata, the
Tathāgata’s spheres of action, the Tathāgata’s spiritual powers, the
Tathāgata’s deeds, the Tathāgata’s powers, the Tathāgata’s fearless­
nesses, the Tathāgata’s samādhis, the Tathāgata’s spiritual super­
knowledges, the Tathāgata’s sovereign masteries, the Tathāgata’s
unimpeded abilities, the Tathāgata‘s eyes, the Tathāgata’s ears, the
Tathāgata’s nose, the Tathāgata’s tongue, the Tathāgata’s body, the
Tathāgata’s mind faculty, the Tathāgata’s eloquence, the Tathāgata’s
wisdom, and the Tathāgata’s supremacy. We pray that the Buddha,
the Bhagavat, will also explain these matters for our sakes.
At that time, knowing the thoughts in the minds of the bodhisattvas,
the Bhagavat manifested spiritual superknowledges suited to each
type of being. Then, after manifesting his spiritual superknowledges:
Off to the east, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Golden Form in which there
was a buddha named Unshakable Wisdom. There was a bodhisat­
tva in that world named Mañjuśrī who came to pay respects to the
Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down in reverence116 and
then transformationally created lotus flower dais lion seats off to the
east where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off to the south, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Wondrous Form in which
there was a buddha named Unimpeded Wisdom. There was a bod­
hisattva there named Foremost Enlightenment who came to pay
respects to the Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down in

265

The Flower Adornment Sutra
reverence and then transformationally created lotus flower dais lion
seats off to the south where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off to the west, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Lotus Flower Form in which
there was a buddha named Darkness-Destroying Wisdom. There
was a bodhisattva there named Foremost Wealth who came to pay
respects to the Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down in
reverence and then transformationally created lotus flower dais lion
seats off to the west where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off to the north, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Campaka Flower Form in
which there was a buddha named Awesome Mannered Wisdom.
There was a bodhisattva there named Foremost Jewel who came to
pay respects to the Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down
in reverence and then transformationally created lotus flower dais
lion seats off to the north where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off to the northeast, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms in
ten buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Utpala Flower Form in
which there was a buddha named Sign-Cognizing Wisdom. There
was a bodhisattva there named Foremost Meritorious Qualities who
came to pay respects to the Buddha together with bodhisattvas as
numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they
bowed down in reverence and then transformationally created lotus
flower dais lion seats off to the northeast where they sat in the lotus
posture.
Off to the southeast, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms
in ten buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Gold Form in which
there was a buddha named Ultimate Wisdom. There was a bod­
hisattva there named Foremost Eye who came to pay respects to the
Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten
buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down in reverence and
then transformationally created lotus flower dais lion seats off to the
southeast where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off to the southwest, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms in
ten buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Jeweled Form in which
there was a buddha named Supreme Wisdom. There was a bodhisat­
tva there named Foremost Vigor who came to pay respects to the
Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten

Chapter 7 — The Names of the Tathāgata
266
buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down in reverence and
then transformationally created lotus flower dais lion seats off to the
southwest where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off to the northwest, beyond worlds as numerous as the atoms
in ten buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Vajra Form in which
there was a buddha named Sovereign Wisdom. There was a bod­
hisattva there named Foremost Dharma who came to pay respects to
the Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in
ten buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down in reverence
and then transformationally created lotus flower dais lion seats off to
the northwest where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off in the regions toward the nadir, beyond worlds as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Crystal
Form in which there was a buddha named Pure Wisdom. There was a
bodhisattva there named Foremost Wisdom who came to pay respects
to the Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms
in ten buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed down in reverence
and then transformationally created lotus flower dais lion seats off in
the direction of the nadir where they sat in the lotus posture.
Off in the regions toward the zenith, beyond worlds as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, there was a world called Equal
Form in which there was a buddha named Contemplative Wisdom.
There was a bodhisattva there named Foremost Worthy who came
to pay respects to the Buddha together with bodhisattvas as numer­
ous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Having arrived, they bowed
down in reverence and then transformationally created lotus flower
dais lion seats off in the direction of the zenith where they sat in the
lotus posture.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva-mahāsattva, assisted by the
awesome powers of the Buddha, surveyed the entire congregation of
bodhisattvas and spoke these words:
These bodhisattvas are exceedingly rare. Sons of the Buddha, the
lands of the buddhas are inconceivable. The station of buddhahood,
the adornment of the buddha kṣetras, the nature of the dharmas of
buddhahood, the purification of the buddha kṣetras, the Dharma
taught by the buddhas, the emergence of the buddhas, the estab­
lishment of the buddha kṣetras, and the buddhas’ anuttara-samyak-
saṃbodhi are all inconceivable.
And how is this so? Sons of the Buddha, all buddhas through­
out the worlds of the ten directions, knowing the differences in all

267

The Flower Adornment Sutra
beings’ aspirations, adapt to what is appropriate for them and speak
Dharma in order to train them. He engages in actions such as these
throughout realms equal in their vastness to the entire Dharma
realm and the realms of empty space.
Sons of the Buddha, within the four continents of this Sahā
World, the Tathāgata uses many different bodies with many differ­
ent designations, many different physical appearances, many dif­
ferent heights, many different life spans, many different locations,
many different faculties, many different birthplaces, many different
languages, and many different contemplations to enable all beings
to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, even within these four continents, the
Tathāgata may be known as Perfected in Every Meaning, may be
known as Full Moon, may be known as Lion’s Roar, may be known
as Śā kyamuni, may be known as Seventh Rishi, may be known as
Vairocana, may be known as Gotama, may be known as the Great
Śrāmaṇa, may be known as Supreme, or may be known as the
Guiding Master. He is known by a myriad names such as these by
which he enables all beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the east of these four continents, there is
another world called Well Protected in which the Tathāgata may
be known as Vajra, may be known as Sovereign Mastery, may be
known as Wise, may be known as Invincible, may be known as
Cloud King, may be known as Uncontentious, may be known as
Able to Lead, may be known as Mind’s Delight, may be known as
Incomparable, or may be known as Beyond Discourse. He is known
by a myriad names such as these by which he enables all beings to
each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the south of these four continents, there
is another world called Difficult to Endure in which the Tathāgata
may be known as Indra, may be known as Precious Name, may be
known as Stainless, may be known as Truth, may be known as Able
to Train, may be known as Joyful, may be known as Great Fame,
may be known as Able to Benefit, may be known as Boundless, or
may be known as Supreme. He is known by a myriad names such
as these by which he enables all beings to each acquire knowledge
and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the west of these four continents, there
is another world called Personal Wisdom in which the Tathāgata
may be known as Water Deva, may be known as Joy to Behold,
may be known as Supreme King, may be known as Training Deva,
may be known as Genuine Wisdom, may be known as Arrived at

Chapter 7 — The Names of the Tathāgata
268
the Ultimate, may be known as Joyous, may be known as Dharma
Wisdom, may be known as Done with the Work, or may be known
as Dwelling in Goodness. He is known by a myriad names such as
these by which he enables all beings to each acquire knowledge and
vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the north of these four continents, there is
another world called Lion of Existence in which the Tathāgata may
be known as Great Muni, may be known as Ascetic, may be known
as World Honored One, may be known as Supreme Field, may be
known as Omniscient, may be known as Mind of Goodness, may be
known as Pristine Purity, may be known as Īśvaradhvana,117 may be
known as Supreme Benefactor, or may be known as Consummate
Ascetic. He is known by a myriad names such as these by which he
enables all beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the northeast of these four continents,
there is another world called Wondrous Contemplation in which
the Tathāgata may be known as Subduer of Demons, may be known
as Perfected, may be known as Extinguished, may be known as
Worthy Deva, may be known as Beyond Desires, may be known
as Supreme Wisdom, may be known as Equanimous Mind, may
be known as Invincible, may be known as Wisdom Sound, or may
be known as Rare Manifestation. He is known by a myriad names
such as these by which he enables all beings to each acquire knowl­
edge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the southeast of these four continents,
there is another world called Joyous Bliss in which the Tathāgata
may be known as Ultimate Majesty, may be known as Mass of
Flaming Light, may be known as Universal Knower, may be known
as Esoteric Mystery, may be known as Liberated, may be known as
Peacefully Abiding Nature, may be known as Dharma-Accordant
Conduct, may be known as Pure-Eyed King, may be known as
Greatly Valiant Stalwart, or may be known as Power of Vigor. He
is known by a myriad names such as these by which he enables all
beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the southeast of these four continents,
there is another world called Extremely Durable in which the
Tathāgata may be known as Peacefully Abiding, may be known as
Wisdom King, may be known as Perfect Fulfillment, may be known
as Unshakable, may be known as Wondrous Eyes, may be known as
Summit King, may be known as Sovereign Sound, may be known
as Giver of Everything, may be known as Rishi Who Supports the
Multitude, or may be known as Supreme Sumeru. He is known by a

269

The Flower Adornment Sutra
myriad names such as these by which he enables all beings to each
acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, to the northwest of these four continents,
there is another world called Wondrous Ground in which the
Tathāgata may be known as Universally Pervasive, may be known
as Flaming Light, may be known as Maṇi Jewel Topknot, may be
known as Worthy of Remembrance, may be known as Unsurpassable
Meaning, may be known as Forever Joyous, may be known as Pure
Nature, may be known as Sphere of Light, may be known as Long
Arms, or may be known as Abiding in the Origin. He is known by a
myriad names such as these by which he enables all beings to each
acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, in the regions below these four conti­
nents, there is another world called Flaming Wisdom in which the
Tathāgata may be known as Accumulated Roots of Goodness, may
be known as Lion Signs, may be known as Fiercely Sharp Wisdom,
may be known as Flaming Golden Light, may be known as Guide for
All, may be known as Ultimate Sound, may be known as Benefactor,
may be known as Arrived at the Ultimate, may be known as God of
Truth, or may be known as Pervasively Supreme. He is known by a
myriad names such as these by which he enables all beings to each
acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, in the regions above these four continents,
there is another world called Maintaining the Ground in which the
Tathāgata may be known as Possessed of Wisdom, may be known
as Pure Countenance, may be known as Enlightened Wisdom, may
be known as Foremost Superiority, may be known as Creator of
Adornments, may be known as Inspiring Delight, may be known
as Fulfilled Mind, may be known as Like a Blaze, may be known
as Upholder of Precepts, or may be known as Path of Unity. He is
known by a myriad names such as these by which he enables all
beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, this Sahā world has a hundred koṭīs of four-
continent lands in which the Tathāgata is known by hundreds of
myriads of koṭīs of different names by which he enables all beings
to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the east of this Sahā world
is called Secret Training in which the Tathāgata may be known as
Equanimous, may be known as Extraordinary Supremacy, may be
known as Comfort, may be known as Mind Enlightener, may be
known as Learned Wisdom,118 may be known as Truthful Discourse,
may be known as Realized Sovereign Mastery, may be known as

Chapter 7 — The Names of the Tathāgata
270
Supreme Body, may be known as Great Valor, or may be known
as Incomparable Wisdom. He is known by hundreds of myriads of
koṭīs of different names such as these by which he enables all beings
to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the south of this Sahā world
is called Overflowing Abundance in which the Tathāgata may be
known as Original Nature, may be known as Diligent Intent,119 may
be known as Unsurpassed Honored One, may be known as Great
Wisdom Torch, may be known as Independent, may be known as
Light Treasury, may be known as Wisdom Treasury, may be known
as Merit Treasury, may be known as God Among Gods, or may
be known as Great Sovereign Mastery. He is known by hundreds
of myriads of koṭīs of different names such as these by which he
enables all beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the west of this Sahā world
is called Stainless in which the Tathāgata may be known as Mind-
Made, may be known as Path Knower, may be known as Origin of
Peaceful Dwelling, may be known as Able to Untie the Bonds, may
be known as Penetrator of Meaning, may be known as Delighting
in Discernment, may be known as Supreme View, may be known as
Trainer of Conduct, may be known as Manifold Austerities, or may
be known as Perfected Power. He is known by hundreds of myriads
of koṭīs of different names such as these by which he enables all
beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the north of this Sahā world
is called Bountiful Bliss in which the Tathāgata may be known as
Campaka Flower Form, may be known as Solar Treasury, may be
known as Station of Goodness, may be known as Manifest Spiritual
Superknowledges, may be known as Transcendent Nature, may
be known as Wisdom Sun, may be known as Unimpeded, may be
known as Appearing Like the Moon, may be known as Swift Wind,
or may be known as Pure Body. He is known by hundreds of myri­
ads of koṭīs of different names such as these by which he enables all
beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the northeast of this Sahā
world is called Attraction in which the Tathāgata may be known as
Forever Free of Suffering, may be known as Universal Liberation,
may be known as Great Hidden Treasure, may be known as
Liberated Wisdom, may be known as Treasury of the Past, may be
known as Jewel Radiance, may be known as World Transcendence,
may be known as Ground of the Unimpeded, may be known as
Treasury of Pure Faith, or may be known as Unshakable Mind. He

271

The Flower Adornment Sutra
is known by hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of different names such
as these by which he enables all beings to each acquire knowledge
and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the southeast of this Sahā
world is called Beneficence in which the Tathāgata may be known
as Manifest Radiance, may be known as Wisdom of Cessation, may
be known as Exquisite Sound, may be known as Supreme Faculties,
may be known as Canopy of Adornments, may be known as Root
of Vigor, may be known as Perfected Discernment, may be known
as Supreme Meditative Absorption, may be known as Simplified
Discourse, or may be known as Ocean of Wisdom. He is known by
hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of different names such as these by
which he enables all beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the southwest of this
Sahā world is called Rarity in which the Tathāgata may be known
as Lord of the Munis, may be known as Replete With the Many
Jewels, may be known as Liberation from the World, may be known
as Faculty of Universal Awareness, may be known as Supreme
Speech, may be known as Utterly Clear Vision, may be known as
Sovereign Faculties, may be known as Great Master of the Rishis,
may be known as Karmic Guide, or may be known as Vajra Lion. He
is known by hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of different names such
as these by which he enables all beings to each acquire knowledge
and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world to the northwest of this Sahā
world is called Joyous Delight in which the Tathāgata may be known
as Mass of Wonderful Flowers, may be known as Sandalwood
Canopy, may be known as Lotus Treasury, may be known as Beyond
All Dharmas, may be known as Dharma Jewel, may be known as
Born Again, may be known as Pure and Marvelous Canopy, may be
known as Vast Eye, may be known as Possessed of Good Dharmas,
may be known as Especially Mindful of Dharma, or may be known
as Net Treasury. He is known by hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of
different names such as these by which he enables all beings to each
acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world below this Sahā world is
called Gate Key in which the Tathāgata may be known as Generating
Blazing Light, may be known as Subduer of the Poisons, may be
known as Indra’s Bow, may be known as Abode of Impermanence,
may be known as Origin of Enlightenment, may be known as
Severing Proliferation, may be known as Great Swiftness, may be
known as Forever Delighting in Giving, may be known as Path of

Chapter 7 — The Names of the Tathāgata
272
Discernment, or may be known as Banner of Victory. He is known
by hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of different names such as these by
which he enables all beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, the next world above this Sahā world is
called Shaking Sound in which the Tathāgata may be known as
Banner of Valor, may be known as Measureless Jewels, may be
known as Delighting in Great Giving, may be known as Celestial
Light, may be known as Flourishing Auspiciousness, may be known
as Transcendent Realm, may be known as Universal Lord, may be
known as Irreversible Wheel, may be known as Beyond the Many
Evils, or may be known as Omniscience. He is known by hundreds
of myriads of koṭīs of different names such as these by which he
enables all beings to each acquire knowledge and vision.
Sons of the Buddha, just as this is so in this Sahā World, so too
is it so that there are many different names for the Tathāgata in the
east in its hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of countless, measureless,
boundless, incomparable, innumerable, unstateable, inconceivable,
incalculable, and ineffable worlds extending to the very ends of the
Dharma realm and the realm of empty space. So too is this also true
in the southerly, the westerly, and northerly directions, as well as in
the regions associated with the four midpoints, the zenith, and the
nadir.
Just as in the past, when the Bhagavat was a bodhisattva, he
made use of many different discussions, many different languages,
many different voices, many different deeds, many different karmic
effects, many different situations, many different skillful means,
many different faculties, many different kinds of beliefs, and many
different stations on the path to become ripened himself, so too did
he use these in this way to enable beings to acquire knowledge and
vision by teaching them the Dharma in this manner.
The End of Chapter Seven

Chapter 8
The Four Truths of the Āryas120
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva-mahāsattva informed the bod­
hisattvas, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, in this Sahā World, the āryas’ truth of suffer­
ing may be synonymous with karmic offense, with coercion, with
change, with grasping conditions, with the aggregates,121 with [the
piercing of] thorns,122 with the roots on which it depends,123 with
deception, with an abscess, or with the actions of the foolish com­
mon person.
Sons of the Buddha, in this Sahā World, the āryas’ truth of the
accumulation of suffering may be synonymous with the fetters,
with destruction, with the concept of cravings-based attachment,
with erroneous awareness, with pursuit and involvement,124 with
definite certainty, with a net, with conceptual proliferation, with
subsequent actions, or with being based on inverted views.
Sons of the Buddha, in this Sahā World, the āryas’ truth of the
cessation of suffering may be synonymous with noncontention,
with separation from defilement, with quiescence, with signless­
ness, with nonsubmersion, with the absence of inherent existence,
with the absence of obstacles, with cessation, with reality of sub­
stance, or with abiding in the inherently existent nature.
Sons of the Buddha, in this Sahā World, the āryas’ truth of the
path to the cessation of suffering may be synonymous with the One
Vehicle, with progression toward quiescence, with guidance, with
becoming ultimately free of discriminations, with uniform equal­
ity, with relinquishing burdens, with having nothing one pursues,
with accordance with the intent of the āryas, with the practice of the
rishis, or with the ten treasures.125
Sons of the Buddha, in this Sahā World, in speaking of the four
truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs of des­
ignations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of beings,
one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Secret Training World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be synony­
mous with the root of seeking, with not achieving emancipation,
with the root of the fetters, with doing what one should not do, with

274

The Flower Adornment Sutra
constant contentiousness, with having no power of discernment,
with the bases on which actions depend, with extreme suffering,
with agitation, or with things with form.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Secret Training World, what is referred
to as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suffering may be synon­
ymous with acquiescing in saṃsāra, with defiled attachment, with
being roasted, with flowing along in cyclic existence, with the roots
of ruination, with continuing along in the stations of existence, with
evil conduct, with cravings-based attachment, with the source of
sickness, or with partial assessment.126
Sons of the Buddha, in the Secret Training World, what is
referred to as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffering may
be synonymous with the ultimate truth, with emancipation, with
praiseworthiness, with peace and security, with skillful entry into
the stations, with training, with unity, with absence of karmic trans­
gressions, with abandoning desire, or with decisiveness.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Secret Training World, what is referred
to as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation of suffering may be
synonymous with valiant leadership, with supreme practice, with
transcendence, with the possession of skillful means, with the eye
that beholds uniform equality, with abandoning the extremes, with
complete awakening, with attraction,127 with the supreme eye, or
with contemplation of the directions.128
Sons of the Buddha, in the Secret Training World, in speaking of
the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Most Victorious World, what is
referred to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be
synonymous with terror, with one’s individual mortal allotment,129
with odious loathsomeness, with an endeavor which must be taken
on, with change, with calling forth adversaries,130 with deceptive
usurpation, with a difficulty in working with others, with errone­
ous discriminations, or with possessing strength.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Most Victorious World, what is
referred to as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suffering may
be identified with ruination, with the root of delusion, with a great
adversary, with a sharp blade, with the loss of flavor, with enmity,
with something not one’s own, with an evil guide, with increasing
darkness, or with the destruction of wholesome benefit.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Most Victorious World, what is
referred to as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffering may be

Chapter 8 — The Four Truths of the Āryas
275
synonymous with great meaning, with beneficence, with meaning
within meaning, with measurelessness, with what should be per­
ceived, with abandoning discriminations, with the most supreme
form of training, with perpetual equality, with the ability to dwell
with others, or with the unconditioned.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Most Victorious World, what is
referred to as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation of suf­
fering may be synonymous with the ability to incinerate, with the
superior grade, with decisiveness, with indestructibility, with pro­
found skillful means, with emancipation, with noninferiority, with
penetrating comprehension, with having the nature of liberation, or
with the ability to reach liberation.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Most Victorious World, in speaking of
the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Immaculate World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be syn­
onymous with deep remorse, with providing for needs, with con­
tinuous cyclic existence, with dwelling in a city, with being of but
a single flavor, with being contrary to Dharma, with dwelling in a
house, with a circumstance to which one is erroneously attached,
with false views, or with innumerability.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Immaculate World, what is referred
to as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suffering may be syn­
onymous with the absence of anything real, with speech as the only
thing that exists, with absence of pristine purity, with the land of
one’s birth, with grasping, with vulgar baseness, with proliferation,
with a heavy burden, with the ability to produce [suffering], or with
being coarse and ferocious.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Immaculate World, what is referred to
as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffering may be synonymous
with ultimate incomparability, with utter riddance, with stainless
purity, with the origin of supremacy, with unification, with not hav­
ing to provide for needs, with the extinguishing of delusions, with
extreme excellence, with ultimacy, or with destroying imprints.131
Sons of the Buddha, in the Immaculate World, what is referred
to as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation of suffering may be
synonymous with something which is solidly enduring, with the
factor of skillful means, with the root of liberation, with the real­
ity of its fundamental nature,132 with invulnerability to defamation,
with extreme purity, with the limit of all stations of existence,133 with

276

The Flower Adornment Sutra
the preservation of what has been conveyed,134 with doing what is
ultimate, or with purification of discrimination.135
Sons of the Buddha, in the Immaculate World, in speaking of
the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Overflowing Abundance World, what
is referred to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may
be synonymous with the station of cravings-induced defilement,
with the root of hazard and harm, with a portion of the ocean of
existences, with what is created by accumulation, with the root of
differences, with proliferation, with creation and destruction, with
obstruction, with the origin of knives and swords, or with the prod­
uct of numerous factors.136
Sons of the Buddha, in the Overflowing Abundance World, what
is referred to as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suffering may
be synonymous with odiousness, with [mere] names, with endless­
ness, with one’s share, with undesirability, with its ability to seize
and bite, with things which are crude and vulgar, with cravings-
based attachment, with a container,137 or with movement.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Overflowing Abundance World, what
is referred to as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffering may
be synonymous with severance of continuity, with opening and
revealing, with wordlessness, with nothing being cultivated, with
nothing being perceived, with nothing being done, with quiescence,
with having already completely burned it all up, with relinquishing
a heavy burden, or with riddance of whatever is bad.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Overflowing Abundance World, what
is referred to as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation of suffer­
ing may be synonymous with quiescent practices, with emancipat­
ing practices, with diligent cultivation of realizations, with going
safely and securely,138 with a measureless life span, with thorough
and utterly complete knowing, with the ultimate path, with what
is difficult to cultivate, with arriving at the opposite shore, or with
invincibility.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Overflowing Abundance World, in
speaking of the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myr­
iads of koṭīs of designations such as these by which, adapting to the
minds of beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Attraction World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be syn­
onymous with the ability to rob,139 with an unwholesome friend,

Chapter 8 — The Four Truths of the Āryas
277
with much terror, with all sorts of conceptual proliferation, with the
nature of the hells, with the absence of real meaning, with the bur­
den of desire, with deep and thick roots,140 with being transformed
by following the mind, or with basic emptiness.141
Sons of the Buddha, in the Attraction World, what is referred to
in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suffer­
ing may be synonymous with covetous attachment, with the com­
pletion of evil deeds, with the evil of karmic transgressions, with
swiftness,142 with the ability to grasp, with thought, with having
effects, with the absence of ineffability, with being ungraspable, or
with flowing along in cyclic existence.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Attraction World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffer­
ing may be synonymous with irreversibility, with transcendence of
words and speech, with signlessness, with the capacity to please,
with solidity, with superior sublimity, with transcendence of delu­
sion, with complete cessation, with remaining distant from evil, or
with emancipation.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Attraction World, what is referred to
in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation of
suffering may be synonymous with transcendence of words, with
non-contentiousness, with providing teaching and guidance, with
skillful dedications, with great skillfulness, with different skillful
means, with being like empty space, with the practice of quiescence,
with supreme wisdom, or with the ability to completely compre­
hend meaning.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Attraction World, in speaking of
the four truths of the ārya, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Beneficence World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be syn­
onymous with a heavy burden, with non-solidity, with being like
a thief, with aging and death, with being created by craving, with
flowing along in cyclic existence, with wearisomeness, with an odi­
ous appearance, with growth, or with a sharp blade.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Beneficence World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suf­
fering may be synonymous with ruination, with turbidity, with
retreat and loss, with powerlessness, with loss, with contradictions,
with disharmony, with whatsoever is done, with grasping, or with
desires in the mind.

278

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, in the Beneficence World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffering
may be synonymous with escaping from prison, with truth, with
escaping difficulties, with protection, with abandoning evil, with
adaptability, with what is fundamental, with relinquishing causes,
with the unconditioned, or with the absence of continuation.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Beneficence World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessa­
tion of suffering may be synonymous with comprehension of the
utter nonexistence of everything, with the seals of all things,143 with
the treasury of samādhis, with the acquisition of radiance, with
the dharma of irreversibility, with the ability to bring existence to
an utter end, with a vast road, with the ability to train, with the
existence of peaceful security, or with the root of no longer flowing
along in cyclic existence.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Beneficence World, in speaking of
the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Rarity World, what is referred to in
this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be synonymous
with dangerous desires, with a place of bondage, with erroneous
action, with following feelings, with shamelessness, with the root
of desire, with a constant flowing river, with constant destruction,
with the nature of a flaming torch, or with much misery.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Rarity World, what is referred to
in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suf­
fering may be synonymous with vast lands,144 with enabling the
rebirth destinies,145 with distancing oneself from wisdom, with
being stranded in difficulties, with terror, with neglectfulness,
with collection,146 with a place of attachment, with the owner of a
house,147 or with bonds.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Rarity World, what is referred to in
this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffering may
be synonymous with fulfillment, with the undying, with non-self,
with absence of inherent existence, with the end of discriminations,
with abiding in happiness, with being free of limitations, with the
severance of flowing along in cyclic existence, with the cutting off
of the bases of action, or with non-duality.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Rarity World, what is referred to in
this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation of
suffering may be synonymous with great light, with the ocean of

Chapter 8 — The Four Truths of the Āryas
279
discourses, with analysis of meaning, with the dharma of harmo­
niousness, with abandonment of attachments, with severance of
continuity, with a vast road, with equality of causation, with pure
skillful means, or with the supreme view.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Rarity World, in speaking of the four
truths of the ārya, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs of des­
ignations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of beings,
one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Joyous Delight World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be syn­
onymous with flowing along in cyclic existence, with production,148
with loss of benefit, with defiled attachment, with a heavy burden,
with differences, with inner danger, with aggregation,149 with an
evil abode, or with the nature of suffering and affliction.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Joyous Delight World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suf­
fering may be synonymous with the ground, with skillful means,
with untimeliness, with unreal dharmas, with bottomlessness,
with collection, with abandoning moral precepts, with the dharmas
of the afflictions, with narrow and inferior views, or with accumu­
lated defilements.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Joyous Delight World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suffer­
ing may be synonymous with breaking with dependencies, with
non-neglectfulness, with truthfulness, with uniform equality, with
goodness and purity, with absence of faults, with absence of devi­
ousness, with signlessness, with sovereign mastery, or with the
unproduced.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Joyous Delight World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation
of suffering may be synonymous with entry into supreme realms,
with severance of accumulations, with stepping beyond those of the
same class, with possessing a vast nature, with cessation of discrim­
inations, with the path of spiritual powers, with manifold skillful
means, with the practice of right mindfulness, with the road of con­
stant quiescence, or with acquisition of the liberations.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Joyous Delight World, in speaking of
the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Gate Key World, what is referred to in
this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may be synonymous

280

The Flower Adornment Sutra
with the signs of ruination, with an unfired vessel, with the product
of a self, with a body in the rebirth destinies,150 with repeated flow­
ing along in cyclic existence, with the gate to the many evils, with
inherent suffering, with what can be cast off, with flavorlessness, or
with coming and going.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Gate Key World, what is referred to in
this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the accumulation of suffering
may be synonymous with the volitional factors,151 with the poison
of anger, with combining,152 with feeling,153 with the conception of
a self,154 with the admixture of poison,155 with empty names, with
contradictoriness, with heated afflictions, or with frightfulness.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Gate Key World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of suf­
fering may be synonymous with absence of accumulation, with
inapprehensibility,156 with marvelous medicine, with indestructibil­
ity, with nonattachment, with immeasurability, with vastness, with
the enlightenment factors,157 with abandoning defilement, or with
freedom from obstacles.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Gate Key World, what is referred to in
this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation of suf­
fering may be synonymous with peaceful and secure conduct, with
abandoning desire, with ultimate reality, with penetrating mean­
ing, with having the nature of ultimacy, with the manifestation of
purity, with focused mindfulness, with progression toward libera­
tion, with salvation, or with supreme conduct.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Gate Key World, in speaking of the
four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Shaking Sound World, what is
referred to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of suffering may
be synonymous with hidden faults, with the world, with dependen­
cies, with arrogance, with the nature of defiled attachment, with
a rushing stream,158 with unenjoyability, with concealment, with
swift destruction,159 or with difficulty in [taking on] the training.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Shaking Sound World, what is
referred to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the accumula­
tion of suffering may be synonymous with what must be subdued,
with tendencies of mind, with the ability to tie one up, with arising
in association with thought, with extending to the end of future
time,160 with a combination of factors,161 with discriminations, with
a gateway,162 with being blown about, or with concealment.

Chapter 8 — The Four Truths of the Āryas
281
Sons of the Buddha, in the Shaking Sound World, what is
referred to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the cessation of
suffering may be synonymous with absence of dependencies, with
ungraspability,163 with turning back and returning,164 with aban­
doning disputation, with what is small, with what is large, with
goodness and purity, with endlessness, with vastness, or with what
possesses unequalled value.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Shaking Sound World, what is referred
to in this Sahā World as the āryas’ truth of the path to the cessation
of suffering may be synonymous with contemplation,165 with the
ability to defeat enemies,166 with the seal of utterly complete know­
ing, with being able to enter the nature,167 with being unopposable,
with limitlessness, with the ability to enter wisdom, with the path
of harmony, with being forever unshakable, or with the supreme
meaning.
Sons of the Buddha, in the Shaking Sound World, in speaking of
the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations such as these by which, adapting to the minds of
beings, one enables the training of them all.
Sons of the Buddha, just as in this Sahā World, in speaking of
the four truths of the āryas, there are four hundred myriads of koṭīs
of designations, so too is it so that in the east there are four hun­
dred myriads of koṭīs of designations in each and every one of its
hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of countless, measureless, bound­
less, incomparable, innumerable, unstateable, inconceivable, incal­
culable, and indescribable numbers of worlds extending to the very
ends of the Dharma realm and the realms of empty space by which,
adapting to the minds of beings, one enables the training of them
all.
Just as this is the case in the easterly direction, so too is this true
in the southerly, the westerly, and northerly directions as well as in
the regions associated with the four midpoints, the zenith, and the
nadir.
Sons of the Buddha, just as in this Sahā World the circumstances
are as described above, so too is this the case for all of those other
worlds throughout the ten directions. In each and every world
among the worlds of the ten directions, in speaking of the āryas’
truth of suffering, there are a hundred koṭīs of myriads of different
designations which are used. So too, in speaking of the āryas’ truth
of accumulation, the āryas’ truth of cessation, and the āryas’ truth
of the path, there are for each of them a hundred myriads of koṭīs

282

The Flower Adornment Sutra
of different designations, all of which, when adapted to the mental
dispositions of beings, enable their training.
The End of Chapter Eight

Chapter 9
The Radiant Enlightenment
At that time, from the wheel signs on the bottoms of his two feet, the
Tathāgata emitted a hundred koṭīs of light rays which illuminated this
great trichiliocosm, including its hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas,168 its
hundred koṭīs of Pūrvavidehas, its hundred koṭīs of Godānīyas, its
hundred koṭīs of Uttarakurus, its hundred koṭīs of great seas, its hun­
dred koṭīs of encircling mountains, its hundred koṭīs of bodhisattvas
taking birth, its hundred koṭīs of bodhisattvas leaving the home life, its
hundred koṭīs of tathāgatas realizing the right enlightenment, its hun­
dred koṭīs of tathāgatas turning the wheel of Dharma, its hundred koṭīs
of tathāgatas entering nirvāṇa, its hundred koṭīs of Sumeru Mountain
Kings, its hundred koṭīs of Four Heavenly Kings Heavens, its hundred
koṭīs of Trāyastriṃśa Heavens, its hundred koṭīs of Yāma Heavens, its
hundred koṭīs of Tuṣita Heavens, its hundred koṭīs of Transformation
of Bliss Heavens, its hundred koṭīs of Free Transformation of Others’
Bliss Heavens, its hundred koṭīs of Assembly of Brahmā Heavens,
its hundred koṭīs of Light-and-Sound Heavens, its hundred koṭīs of
Universal Purity Heavens, its hundred koṭīs of Vast Fruition Heavens,
and its hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens, illuminating them
all so that they all became entirely visible.
Just as in this place, one saw the Buddha, the Bhagavat, sitting
on this lotus flower dais lion throne surrounded by bodhisattvas as
numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, so too, in those hun­
dred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, a hundred koṭīs of tathāgatas also sat there
in this same way.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Their names were: Mañjuśrī
Bodhisattva, Foremost Enlightenment Bodhisattva, Foremost Wealth
Bodhisattva, Foremost Jewel Bodhisattva, Foremost Qualities
Bodhisattva, Foremost Eyes Bodhisattva, Foremost Vigor Bodhisattva,
Foremost Dharma Bodhisattva, Foremost Wisdom Bodhisattva, and
Foremost Worthy Bodhisattva. The lands from which these bodhisat­
tvas came were the Golden Form World, the Wondrous Form World,

284

The Flower Adornment Sutra
the Lotus Flower Form World, The Campaka Flower Form World, the
Utpala Flower Form World, the Gold Form World, the Jewel Form
World, the Vajra Form World, the Lapis Lazuli Form World, and the
Level Form World.
Each of these bodhisattvas had purely cultivated brahmacarya
in the presence of buddhas, namely: Unshakable Wisdom Buddha,
Unimpeded Wisdom Buddha, Liberated Wisdom Buddha, Majestic
Wisdom Buddha, Wisdom of the Radiant Signs Buddha, Ultimate
Wisdom Buddha, Supreme Wisdom Buddha, Sovereign Wisdom
Buddha, Brahman Wisdom Buddha, and Contemplative Wisdom
Buddha.
At that time, in the presence of those buddhas, each of those
Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
If there be anyone who looks upon right enlightenment
as consisting of liberation from the contaminants169
and not being attached to anything in the world,
he is not one who has acquired the eye of the realized path.
If there be anyone who knows that the Tathāgata’s
substance and signs are non-existent
and then cultivates to realize a complete understanding of this,
this person will swiftly become a buddha.
If one is able in observing this world,
to do so with a mind that remains unshaken,
and he is also able to be this way when seeing a buddha’s body,
he is one who is bound to realize the supreme wisdom.
If one’s mind completely understands the identity
of the Buddha and the Dharma
and hence dual conceptions do not manifest in him,
then he is bound to ascend to the inconceivable position.
If one perceives that the Buddha and oneself
share a uniform equality and then becomes established in that
in which there is neither any dwelling nor anything entered,
he is then bound to become one who is rarely ever encountered.
Form and feeling are beyond reckoning.170
So too are perception, karmic formative factors, and consciousness.
If one is able to know them in this way,
then one is bound to become a great muni.
If one is able to step entirely beyond
both mundane and world-transcending views
while still being able to skillfully know dharmas,
one is bound to become one of great dazzling illumination.

Chapter 9 — The Radiant Enlightenment
285
If one generates the resolve to direct one’s dedications
to the realization of all-knowledge
and perceives the mind as unproduced,
then one is bound to acquire great renown.
Beings have no arising,
nor do they have any destruction.
If one acquires wisdom such as this,
one is bound to realize the unsurpassed path.
If one is able to understand the incalculable within what is one
and also understand the oneness of what is incalculable
while completely comprehending their mutual origination,
then one is bound to become one who is fearless.
At that time, light rays went beyond this world and completely illu­
minated ten buddha lands in the eastern direction. So too did this
occur in the same way in the south, the west, and the north as well
as in the four midpoints, above, and below. In each of those worlds,
there were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so forth, up to and
including a hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens. Everything
within them was all made clearly visible.
Just as one beheld the Buddha, the Bhagavat, in this place sitting
on the lotus flower dais lion throne, surrounded by bodhisattvas as
numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, so too, in each and every
one of those other worlds, there were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas
in which a hundred koṭīs of tathāgatas also sat there in the same way.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
Beings, devoid of wisdom,
are injured and poisoned by the thorns of desires.
In order that they might strive for the realization of bodhi—
Such is the purpose of the Dharma of all buddhas.
They everywhere perceive in all dharmas
that the two extremes are always to be abandoned,

286

The Flower Adornment Sutra
that the path is to be realized, that one is to never retreat from it,
and that one is to carry on the turning of this incomparable wheel.
Vigorously cultivating all the practices
for an inconceivable number of kalpas
for the sake of liberating all beings—
Such is the power of the Great Rishi.
The Master Guide conquers the many māras.
He is a valiant and invincible stalwart.
Within his emanated radiance, he expounds the sublime meaning,
acting in this way because of his kindness and compassion.
It is because of his wise mind
that he demolishes all affliction-based obstacles
and perceives everything in but a single mind-moment.
This is due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers.
He beats the drum of right Dharma
and awakens those in the kṣetras of the ten directions,
thereby enabling them all to progress toward bodhi.
Due to his powers of sovereign mastery, he is able to act in this way.
Even without breaking past any of their boundlessly many borders,
he nonetheless roams to all the koṭīs of kṣetras
while remaining free of attachment to any realm of existence.
One such as this possesses sovereign masteries like the Buddha.
The buddhas are like empty space
and are ultimately and forever pure.
Those who, in bringing them to mind, are filled with joyous delight—
All their vows will become fulfilled.
One is willing to even pass through countless kalpas
in each and every one of the hells
for the sake of liberating beings
while still being able to endure such suffering.
One retains no cherishing for either one’s body or life
as one forever protects the Dharma of all buddhas.
With the selfless mind trained to such pliancy,
one becomes able to realize the path of the Tathāgata.
At that time, light rays went beyond ten worlds and everywhere illu­
minated a hundred worlds in the east. So too did this occur in the
same way in the south, the west, and the north as well as in the four
midpoints, above, and below. In every one of those worlds, there were
a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so forth, up to and including a
hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens. Everything within them

Chapter 9 — The Radiant Enlightenment
287
was all made clearly visible. In every one of those Jambudvīpas, one
beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus flower dais lion throne, sur­
rounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha
kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
The Buddha understands that dharmas are like conjurations
with an unimpeded penetrating comprehension.
With a mind that is pure and apart from the many attachments,
he carries forth the training of the many kinds of beings.
Some may see him when first born,
appearing with a marvelous form like a golden mountain.
Abiding in this very last body,
he forever appears as a moon among humans.
Some may see him when engaged in meditative walking,
possessed of his measureless meritorious qualities,
with mindfulness and wisdom which are always skillful,
as this great man walks along with the stride of a lion.
Some may see his blue eyes
surveying the ten directions,
at times displaying a smile
in order to accord with what pleases beings.
Some may see him roaring the lion’s roar
in his extraordinary and incomparable body,
appearing in this very last birth
in which, in whatever he says, there is nothing not true.
Some may see him leaving behind the home life,
becoming liberated from all the bonds,
cultivating the practices of all buddhas,
and always delighting in the quiescence of contemplation.
Some may see him sitting in the site of enlightenment,
awakened in his awareness of all dharmas,

288

The Flower Adornment Sutra
having reached the far shore in acquiring meritorious qualities
and having brought delusion’s darkness and afflictions to an end.
Some may see him as a supremely great man
having completely fulfilled the mind of great compassion,
turning the wheel of the sublime Dharma,
and liberating countless beings.
Some may see him roaring the lion’s roar,
emanating the most extraordinary awesome light
and stepping utterly beyond everyone in the world
with incomparable powers of the spiritual superknowledges.
Some may see him with quiescent mind,
as if the lamp of the world had been extinguished forever,
manifesting many different sorts of spiritual superknowledges.
The one possessed of the ten powers is able to be like this.
At that time, light rays went beyond a hundred worlds and every­
where illuminated a thousand worlds in the east. So too did this occur
in the same way in the south, the west, and the north as well as in the
four midpoints, above, and below. In every one of those worlds, there
were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so forth, up to and includ­
ing a hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens. Everything within
them was all made clearly visible. In every one of those Jambudvīpas,
one beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus flower dais lion throne,
surrounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha
kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
In his penetrating comprehension of the extremely profound dharmas,
the Buddha has no one who is his equal.
Beings remain unable to completely understand them.
Hence, for their sakes, he reveals them sequentially.
An inherently existent self has never existed.
The possessions of a self are also empty and quiescent.

Chapter 9 — The Radiant Enlightenment
289
How then could any of the tathāgatas
have ever apprehended any existence of their own bodies?
He who is liberated in clarity and conduct
is beyond reckoning and is utterly without peer.
Even employing all of the world’s bases of causal inference
in seeking to find faults, one still could not find any.
The Buddha is not any of the world’s aggregates,
sense realms, sense bases, or dharmas of birth and death.
He could not be the product of any of the enumerated dharmas.
He is therefore known as the Lion Among Men.
His nature is originally empty and quiescent,
he is completely liberated both within and without,
and he has abandoned all erroneous thought.
His incomparable Dharma is of this very sort.
His essential nature is always unmoving,
free of self, and neither comes nor goes,
and yet he is able to awaken the world
and carry on his boundless training of everyone.
He always delights in contemplating quiescence,
singularity of signs, and the absence of dualities.
His mind is neither increased nor decreased
even as manifests measureless spiritual powers.
He does not engage in the actions of beings
whose causes and conditions produce karmic retributions,
and yet he is unimpeded in his ability to completely understand them.
The Dharma of the Well Gone One is of this very sort.
The many different sorts of beings
flow along in cyclic existence throughout the ten directions.
The Tathāgata does not discriminate among them.
Hence he liberates all the infinitely many kinds of beings.
The physical forms of all buddhas, the color of real gold,
are nonexistent even as they pervade all realms of existence,
adapting to the mental dispositions of beings
as they proclaim for their sakes the dharma of quiescence.
At that time, light rays went beyond a thousand worlds and every­
where illuminated ten thousand worlds in the east. So too did this
occur in the same way in the south, the west, and the north as well
as in the four midpoints, above, and below. In every one of those
worlds, there were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so forth,
up to and including a hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens.

290

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Everything within them was all made clearly visible. In every one
of those Jambudvīpas, one beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus
flower dais lion throne, surrounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
Arouse the mind of great compassion,
determined to rescue and protect all beings,
and forever go beyond the multitudes of humans and devas.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
With a mind that always feels faith and delight in the Buddha,
and with a resolve that never turns back in retreat,
draw near to all the tathāgatas.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
Aspiring to the meritorious qualities of a buddha
with a resolve that is forever irreversible,
dwell in clear and cool wisdom.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
In all the actions of one’s awesome deportment,
always bear in mind the meritorious qualities of the Buddha,
never ceasing to do so for even a moment, whether day or night.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
Contemplating the boundlessness of the three periods of time,
train in the meritorious qualities of those buddhas,
remaining forever free of weariness of mind.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
Contemplate the body in accordance with its true character
in which everything is quiescent cessation
while abandoning attachments to a self or the absence of a self.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
With a mind that regards beings equally
and does not give rise to any discriminations,

Chapter 9 — The Radiant Enlightenment
291
enter the realm of reality.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
Lifting up all the infinitely many worlds
and everywhere drinking down all the oceans,
develop the power of these spiritual superknowledges.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
Reflect upon all lands’
characteristics of form and formlessness
and become able to know them all.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
Among the atoms of the lands of the ten directions,
in every single atom, there exists a buddha.
Become able to know the number of them all.
One should engage in deeds such as these.
At that time, light rays went beyond ten thousand worlds and every­
where illuminated a hundred thousand worlds in the east. So too
did this occur in the same way in the south, the west, and the north
as well as in the four midpoints, above, and below. In every one of
those worlds, there were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so
forth, up to and including a hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens.
Everything within them was all made clearly visible. In every one
of those Jambudvīpas, one beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus
flower dais lion throne, surrounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
Where there are those who view the Tamer of Men
on the basis of his awesome virtue, physical form, or clan,
these are the inverted views of those afflicted with faulty vision.
They are unable to know the supreme Dharma.
The marks and such of the Tathāgata’s physical form
are such that no one in the world could fathom,

292

The Flower Adornment Sutra
for, even trying in unison to assess them for koṭīs of nayutas of kalpas,
his physical marks and awesome virtue become ever more boundless.
The essence of a tathāgata is not constituted by his signs,
but rather by the dharma of signlessness and quiescence.
Yet his physical marks and awesome deportment are all complete
so that, as befits their aspirations, those in the world all may see them.
The Dharma of the Buddha is sublime and difficult to assess.
Of all words and speech, none are even able to approach it.
It is neither compounded nor uncompounded.
Its essential nature is quiescence free of any signs.
The Buddha’s body is unproduced, beyond frivolous theorizations,
and not a dharma reducible to the aggregates’ different factors.
One who acquires the powers of sovereign mastery definitely sees it.
He is fearless in his actions and he transcends the path of words.
[He sees] body and mind as the same171
and is liberated in all matters, both within and without.172
He abides in right mindfulness throughout an eternity of kalpas,
is free of attachments and has nothing by which he is fettered.
Whatever is practiced by one whose mind is pure and radiant
is utterly free of any defiling attachments.
His wisdom eye has no place it does not completely see
as he carries on his vast benefiting of beings.
His one body becomes measurelessly many
and the measurelessly many in turn become but one.
He completely knows all worlds
and manifests his form everywhere within them all.
These bodies have no place from which they come,
nor do they have any place they come together.
It is due to the discriminations made by beings
that they see the Buddha’s many different kinds of bodies.
The mind discriminates the world,
yet this mind has no place it exists.
The Tathāgata knows this dharma.
Just so should one view the body of the Buddha.
At that time, light rays went beyond a hundred thousand worlds and
everywhere illuminated a hundred myriads of worlds in the east. So
too did this occur in the same way in the south, the west, and the
north as well as in the four midpoints, above, and below. In every one
of those worlds, there were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so
forth, up to and including a hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens.

Chapter 9 — The Radiant Enlightenment
293
Everything within them was all made clearly visible. In every one
of those Jambudvīpas, one beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus
flower dais lion throne, surrounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
The Tathāgata, the one most possessed of sovereign mastery,
has transcended the world and has nothing on which he depends.
He is replete with all the meritorious qualities,
and liberates those in all realms of existence.
He is free of defilements, free of attachments,
free of conceptions, and has no place in which he abides.
His essential nature is measureless.
All who behold him are moved to praise him.
His radiance is everywhere pure,
for the dusts and entanglements have been entirely rinsed away.
He remains unmoving and has abandoned the two extremes.
This is the Tathāgata’s wisdom.
If one beholds the Tathāgata
with a body and mind that have abandoned discriminations,
then he will forever escape from all doubt-ridden hesitation
with respect to all of the dharmas.
Within all the worlds,
he everywhere turns the wheel of the Dharma.
Even in the absence of any inherent nature or anything thus turned,
the Master Guide teaches with skillful means.
Where one remains free of doubts or delusions about the Dharma,
forever severs all indulgence in conceptual proliferation,
and refrains from generating discriminating thought,
this is what constitutes mindfulness of the Buddha’s bodhi.
Where one completely comprehends the different dharmas
and remains unattached to mere words and speech

294

The Flower Adornment Sutra
while remaining free of conceptions of oneness or multiplicity,
this is what constitutes accordance with the Buddha’s teachings.
Even within multiplicity, there is nothing with a singular nature.
So, too, in whatsoever is singular, there is no multiplicity.
Where one entirely relinquishes such dualities as these,
one everywhere enters the meritorious qualities of the Buddha.
Where, with respect to both beings and lands,
one beholds them all as quiescent,
while depending on nothing and staying free of discriminations,
he is then able to enter the bodhi of the Buddha.
Even among beings and lands,
no identity or difference can be apprehended at all.
Where one skillfully carries on such contemplations,
this is to know the meaning of the Buddha’s Dharma.
At that time, light rays went beyond a hundred myriads of worlds
and everywhere illuminated a koṭī of worlds in the east. So too did
this occur in the same way in the south, the west, and the north
as well as in the four midpoints, above, and below. In every one of
those worlds, there were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so
forth, up to and including a hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens.
Everything within them was all made clearly visible. In every one
of those Jambudvīpas, one beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus
flower dais lion throne, surrounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
Incomparable wisdom, boundless Dharma,
stepping beyond the ocean of existences, reaching the far shore,
and acquiring life span and radiance, both without peer—
Such is the power of expedients of the One of Meritorious Qualities.
Completely understanding all the dharmas of the Buddha,
always tirelessly contemplating the three periods of time,

Chapter 9 — The Radiant Enlightenment
295
and, although engaging with sense realms, still not discriminating—
Such is the power of expedients of the Inconceivable One.
Delighting in contemplating beings, yet with no conception of beings,
everywhere regarding rebirth destinies with no concept of destinies,
and always abiding in dhyāna stillness without tethering the mind—
Such is the power of expedients of those with unimpeded wisdom.
Possessing a skillful penetrating comprehension of all dharmas,
diligently cultivating the path to nirvāṇa with right mindfulness,
delighting in liberation, and abandoning partiality—
Such is the power of expedients of one who abides in quiescence.
Where one is able to exhort others to progress toward Buddha’s bodhi
and toward realizing its omniscient knowledge of the Dharma realm
while skillfully instructing beings to penetrate the truths—
Such is the power of expedients of one dwelling in the Buddha’s mind.
To accord with and enter all the Dharma taught by the Buddha,
doing so with vast and unimpeded wisdom,
and to have arrived at fulfillment of the practices of all paths—
Such is the power of expedients of one of masterful skill in cultivation.
Constantly abiding in nirvāṇa, like empty space,
while everywhere conjuring appearances adapted to beings’ minds—
This is to rely on the signless even as one produces what has signs.
Such is the power of expedients of one reaching what is hard to reach.
Daytimes, nighttimes, days and months, and also years and kalpas—
The signs of worlds’ beginnings and ends, creation and destruction—
Remembering such things and completely knowing them all—
Such is the power of expedients of one wise in the measures of time.
All beings undergo birth and death, whether with form or formless,
and whether with perception or without perception.
To completely know all their names—
Such is the power of expedients of one abiding in the inconceivable.
To be able to completely understand all the languages
of all eras of the past, the present, and the future
even as one knows the identity of all three periods of time—
Such is the power of expedients of one with peerless understanding.
At that time, light rays went beyond a koṭī of worlds and everywhere
illuminated ten koṭīs of worlds in the east. So too did this occur in the
same way in the south, the west, and the north as well as in the four
midpoints, above, and below. In every one of those worlds, there were
a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so forth, up to and including a
hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens. Everything within them

296

The Flower Adornment Sutra
was all made clearly visible. In every one of those Jambudvīpas, one
beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus flower dais lion throne, sur­
rounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha
kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:
To extensively cultivate all the austerities with energetic diligence
both day and night while remaining free of weariness or indolence,
and then, having liberated the hard to liberate, to roar the lion’s roar
as he everywhere pursues the teaching of beings—this is his practice.
Beings drift along in cyclic existence in the ocean of desires,
blanketed by a web of ignorance and driven along by intense distress.
He of utmost humanity courageously slices it all away
and vows that they too shall become thus. This is his practice.
Those in the world are neglectful, attached to the five desires,
do not distinguish in accord with reality, and endure many sufferings.
Offering up practice of Buddha’s teachings with ever-focused mind
while also vowing to liberate these beings—this is his practice.
Beings become attached to a self and enter into saṃsāra.
Though one might seek its bounds, one could never find them.
To everywhere serve the tathāgatas, acquire the marvelous Dharma,
and then proclaim it for the sake of others—this is his practice.
Beings have no one to rely on and are bound up by their sicknesses,173
They always sink to the wretched destinies, produce the three poisons,
and are constantly burned by the fierce flames of immense fires.
To liberate them with pure mind—this is his practice.
Beings, confused and deluded, lose the correct path,
always follow mistaken pathways, and enter the dark abodes.
To light the lamp of right Dharma on a grand scale for their sakes,
and to forever serve as a source of illumination—this is his practice.
Beings drift along and drown in the ocean of the existences,
beset by boundless worries and difficulties they cannot control.

Chapter 9 — The Radiant Enlightenment
297
To build a great ship of Dharma for their sakes,
enabling them all to successfully cross beyond it—this is his practice.
Beings are ignorant, do not perceive what is fundamental,
and are deluded, foolish, and crazed amidst perilous difficulties.
Out of sympathy, the Buddha builds them the bridge of Dharma.
To enable their right mindfulness to ascend174—this is his practice.
Seeing that all beings are on a hazardous road,
forever driven along by the sufferings of aging, sickness, and death,
he cultivates all the limitlessly many skillful means,
vowing that he shall liberate them all—this is his practice.
To hear the Dharma and develop resolute faith free of doubt,
to know the nature as empty and quiescent, yet not be frightened,
and to adapt to forms in the six destinies throughout the ten directions
to everywhere teach the many confused beings—this is his practice.
At that time, light rays went beyond ten koṭīs of worlds and every­
where illuminated a hundred koṭīs of worlds in the east, a thousand
koṭīs of worlds, a hundred thousand koṭīs of worlds, a nayuta of koṭīs of
worlds, and a hundred nayutas of koṭīs of worlds. In this way, it illumi­
nated countless, measureless, boundless, incomparable, innumerable,
unstateable, inconceivable, incalculable, and indescribable numbers
of worlds extending to the very ends of the Dharma realm and the
realm of empty space.
So too did this occur in the same way in the south, the west, and the
north as well as in the four midpoints, above, and below. In every one
of those worlds, there were a hundred koṭīs of Jambudvīpas, and so
forth, up to and including a hundred koṭīs of Ultimate Form Heavens.
Everything within them was all made clearly visible. In every one
of those Jambudvīpas, one beheld the Tathāgata sitting on the lotus
flower dais lion throne, surrounded by bodhisattvas as numerous as
the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras.
Then, in all cases due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, a great bodhisattva came to where the Buddha
was. Each of them came together with bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras. Those great bodhisattvas were
known as Mañjuśrī, and so forth. The lands from which they came
were the Golden Form World, and so forth. Those buddhas whom
they had originally served were Unshakable Wisdom Buddha, and
so forth.
At that time, in each of those places where those buddhas dwelt,
those Mañjuśrī Bodhisattvas simultaneously spoke these verses:

298

The Flower Adornment Sutra
In a single mind-moment, they fully contemplate countless kalpas
without going, without coming, and without dwelling anywhere.
Thus they completely know the events of the three periods of time,
step entirely beyond all skillful means, and perfect the ten powers.
In all ten directions, they have an incomparably fine reputation,
forever abandon all difficulties, and always abide in happiness.
They go forth everywhere and, within all lands,
extensively proclaim Dharma such as this.
In order to benefit beings, they make offerings to the buddhas, and,
in accord with their intent, gain a semblance of the fruits of the path.
They know all dharmas immediately upon encountering them
and manifest their spiritual powers throughout the ten directions.
From their first buddha offerings, their minds were pliant and patient,
they entered deep dhyāna absorptions, contemplated dharmas’ nature,
and everywhere exhorted beings to resolve to cultivate the path.
Because of this, they swiftly realize the unsurpassed fruits of the path.
One who seeks Dharma in the ten directions without perverse intent,175
who, to cultivate the qualities, causes them to become perfectly full,
and who extinguishes duality’s signs of existence and nonexistence—
This person is one who truly sees the Buddha.
One who goes everywhere to all lands of the ten directions,
widely teaching sublime Dharma, spreading its meaning and benefits,
and abiding without wavering at the very apex of reality—
The merit of this person is the same as that of a buddha.
The wheel of the wondrous Dharma as turned by the Tathāgata
in all cases consists of aspects of bodhi.
If, having been able to hear it, one awakens to the nature of dharmas,
such a person as this will always see the Buddha.
If one fails to see even the ten powers as empty and like a conjuration,
though one sees them, this is non-seeing, like the sight of the blind.
If, discriminating, one seizes on signs, one fails to see the Buddha.
If one gains the ultimate departure from attachment, then one can see.
The many sorts of differences in beings according to their karma,
within and without, in the ten directions, are difficult to entirely see.
The Buddha’s body is unimpeded in pervading the ten directions.
It is just as impossible to succeed in seeing it completely.
Just as the countless kṣetras in space
neither come nor go, pervade the ten directions,
and, in their creation and destruction, rely on nothing at all,
so too it is with the Buddha’s pervasion of empty space.
The End of Chapter Nine

Chapter 10
A Bodhisattva Asks for Clarification
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Enlightenment
Bodhisattva, “Son of the Buddha, since the nature of mind is singular,
why then does one observe that there are still many different distinc­
tions [in individual cases] such as going forth into the good destinies
or into the wretched destinies, coming to have complete faculties or
deficient faculties, taking on the same or different kinds of rebirths,
becoming handsome or ugly, or experiencing differences in suffering
or happiness? And why then does action not know mind, mind not
know action, feeling not know retribution, retribution not know feel­
ing, mind not know feeling, feeling not know mind, cause not know
condition, condition not know cause, cognition not know objects, and
objects not know cognition?”
At that time, Foremost Enlightenment Bodhisattva responded
with verses, saying:
The Worthy One now asks about the meaning of this
in order to awaken the many benighted beings.
I shall respond to these matters in accordance with their nature.
May the Worthy One please listen closely.
Dharmas themselves are devoid of any function
and are also devoid of any essential nature.
Therefore it is the case for all of them
that each has no mutual knowing of any other.
This is analogous to the waters of a river
which, forming into rapids, race along together in a rush
even as each of them has no mutual knowing of any other.
So too it is with all dharmas.
This is also comparable to a great conflagration
containing fiercely blazing flames arising in unison
even as each of them has no mutual knowing of any other.
So too it is with all dharmas.
This is also comparable to when a swift wind arises,
as it encounters things, it drums at and blows on all of them
even as each of them has no mutual knowing of any other.
So too it is with all dharmas.

300

The Flower Adornment Sutra
This is also comparable to the many earthly realms
which each in turn dwell in dependence upon the others
even as each of them has no mutual knowing of any other.
So too it is with all dharmas.
The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body,
the mind, the intellectual mind faculty, the sense faculties—
Because of these, one forever flows and turns about in cyclic existence
even as there is no entity who is able to direct this turning about.
It is the nature of dharmas that they are originally unproduced,
even as, when manifesting, production still exists.
In this, there is neither anything able to produce manifestations
nor is there anything that is thereby manifested.
The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body,
the mind, the intellectual mind faculty, the sense faculties—
They are all empty and devoid of any [inherently existent] nature,
yet mistaken thought discriminates and conceives of them as existent.
When contemplated in accordance with principle,
everything is found to be devoid of any [inherently existent] nature.
The Dharma eye is inconceivable.
Vision such as this is not inverted.
Whether “real” or “unreal,”
whether “false” or “not false,”
and whether “worldly” or “world-transcending,”
it is only by resort to artificial designations that one speaks of them.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Wealth
Bodhisattva, “Son of the Buddha, all beings are but non-beings. Why
then does the Tathāgata adapt to their time, adapt to their life spans,
adapt to their bodies, adapt to their actions, adapt to their under­
standings, adapt to their discourse, adapt to their mental disposi­
tions, adapt to their expedients, adapt to their reasoning, and adapt
to their contemplation in manifesting his body for the sake of beings
such as these to teach and train them?”
At that time, Foremost Wealth Bodhisattva responded with verses,
saying:
This is the realm of those who delight in quiescence
and in extensive learning.
I shall now expound on this for the Worthy One.
May the Worthy One now listen to and absorb this.
Analytically contemplating one’s own body,
who is there in this that constitutes a “self”?

Chapter 10 — A Bodhisattva Asks for Clarification
301
If one is able to understand it in this way,
he will comprehend the existence or nonexistence of a self.
This body is artificially established.
and has no place in which it abides.
One who truly understands this body,
remains free of any attachment to it.
If one thoroughly contemplates the body,
and then clearly sees everything in it,
one realizes that dharmas are all empty and false
and does not produce mental discriminations about it.
Who causes the arising of the life span?
And, also, who causes it to withdraw and be extinguished?
Like the appearance of a wheel formed by a twirling firebrand,
its beginning and end cannot be known.
The wise are able to contemplate and realize
that everything that exists is impermanent
and that all dharmas are empty and selfless,
thus becoming forever detached from all signs.
The many karmic retributions arise in accordance with actions.
Like dreams, they are not truly real.
In every mind-moment, they are always undergoing destruction.
Just as it was before, so too it is with what follows.
Dharmas as they are perceived in the world
are ruled solely by the mind.
As befits one’s understanding, one seizes on the many signs.
Due to inverted views, one’s [perceptions] do not accord with reality.
Whatever is discussed in the world
is all the product of discriminations.
There has never been any dharma
that has succeeded in penetrating the nature of dharmas.
It is by the power of the subject and object [of perception]
that the many different dharmas are born
and are swiftly destroyed without a moment’s pause.
In each succeeding mind-moment, they are all just like this.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Jewel Bodhisattva,
“Son of the Buddha, all beings are alike in their possession of the four
great elements and in not having a self or anything belonging to a
self. How then is it that there are those who experience suffering,
those who experience bliss, those who are of fine appearance, those
who are ugly, those who are inwardly good, those who are outwardly

302

The Flower Adornment Sutra
good, those who receive but little, and those who receive much, with
some of them undergoing retribution in the present life, and oth­
ers undergoing retribution in later lives even as, within the Dharma
realm, there is neither beauty nor ugliness?”
At that time, Foremost Jewel Bodhisattva responded with verses,
saying:
It is in accordance with the karmic actions one performs
that just such corresponding retributions arise
even though, as has been taught by all buddhas,
no agent of actions exists at all.
It is as if there were a clean, bright mirror
that, in accordance with whatever appeared before it,
manifested images that in each case differed.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
It is also as if there were a field and seeds,
each of which had no mutual knowledge of the others
even as they were naturally able to generate growth.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
It is also as if there were a skillful conjurer
who was staying at the crossroads
manifesting many kinds of forms and appearances.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
It is just as if there were a marionette
which was able to emit various sounds
in which there was neither any “self” nor “non-self.”
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
It is also just as it is with the many sorts of birds
which, although they all come forth from eggs,
each make sounds which differ from those of the others.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
It is just as, within the womb,
all the sense faculties reach complete development,
even as the physical features have no place from which they came.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
It is also just as in the hells,
there are many different kinds of suffering circumstances
in which none of them have any place from which they came.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
This is analogous to the circumstance of a wheel-turning king
fully endowed with his seven supreme treasures

Chapter 10 — A Bodhisattva Asks for Clarification
303
none of which has any place of origin one could ever find.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
This is also like the situation in all worlds
which are all bound to be burned up by the great conflagration
even as those fires have no place from which they come.
So too it is with the nature of karmic actions.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Qualities
Bodhisattva, “Son of the Buddha, that to which the Tathāgata awak­
ened was the one Dharma. How is it that he then speaks of count­
less dharmas, appears in countless kṣetras, teaches countless beings,
expounds the Dharma with countless voices, manifests countless
bodies, knows countless minds, manifests countless feats of the
spiritual superknowledges, is everywhere able to cause tremors and
movement in countless worlds, manifests countless extraordinary
and supreme adornments, and reveals boundlessly many different
sorts of realms, doing so even though none of these signs of differen­
tiation can be found in the nature of dharmas?”
At that time, Foremost Qualities Bodhisattva responded with
verses, saying:
The meaning of what the Son of the Buddha has asked about
is extremely profound and difficult to completely comprehend.
The wise who are able to understand these matters
forever delight in the meritorious qualities of the Buddha.
It is just as it is with the earth which, though singular in nature,
has the many beings which each dwell separately upon it
even as the earth itself has no concept of singularity or difference.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
So too is this like fire which, though singular in nature,
is able to burn up all things
even as the fire’s flames remain free of any discriminations.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
This is also comparable to the great ocean that, though singular,
supports thousands of myriads of different towering waves
even as the water itself is free of the many kinds of distinctions.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
This is also like the wind that, although singular,
is able to blow upon all things
even as wind itself has no conception of singularity or difference.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
This is also like great clouds and thunder
everywhere raining across the entire earth

304

The Flower Adornment Sutra
even as each raindrop is no different from any other.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
This is also analogous to elemental earth which, though singular,
is able to produce growth in the many different sorts of sprouts
even though the earth itself has no such distinct differences.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
This is like the sun in the absence of clouds or haze
which illuminates everything throughout the ten directions
even as the light rays themselves do not have different natures.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
This is also comparable to when the moon is in the sky
and, throughout the world, there is no one who does not see it
even though it is not that the moon itself goes to their locations.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
This is analogous to the great Brahma Heaven King
who may respond by appearing throughout the trichiliocosm
even as his body remains free of any differences.
So too it is with the Dharma of the buddhas.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Eyes Bodhisattva,
“Son of the Buddha, the Tathāgata’s field of merit is the same, singu­
lar, and no different for everyone. How is it then that one sees differ­
ences in the karmic rewards received by beings as a result of present­
ing gifts to him? For instance, they have many different forms, many
different shapes, many different clans, many different faculties, many
differences in wealth, many different rulers, many different retinues,
many different official positions, many different meritorious quali­
ties, and many differences in the wisdom they possess even as the
mind of the Buddha remains impartial and free of any difference in
his thoughts toward them.”
At that time, Foremost Eyes Bodhisattva responded with verses,
saying:
It is just as with the great earth which, although singular,
accords with each seed in producing sprouts
without regarding them as either foe or friend.
So too it is with the Buddha’s field of merit.
It is also just as with water that, although of a single flavor,
may have differences due to the vessel in which it is placed.
So too it is with the Buddha’s field of merit.
It is because of the minds of beings that there are differences.
This is also like a skilled conjurer
who is able to cause the multitude to be delighted.

Chapter 10 — A Bodhisattva Asks for Clarification
305
The Buddha’s field of merit is just like this,
for it causes beings to feel reverence and be pleased.
It is comparable to a king possessed of both talent and wisdom
who is able to cause the great multitude to become joyful.
The Buddha’s field of merit is just like this,
for it enables the multitude to all find happiness.
It is like an immaculate and bright mirror
that displays images corresponding to the forms [before it].
The Buddha’s field of merit is just like this, for
it is in accord with beings’ minds that they acquire the many rewards.
It is like an agada medicine176
which is able to cure every kind of poisoning.
The Buddha’s field of merit is just like this,
for it does away with all troubles produced by the afflictions.
It is also like the sun when it first rises
and brightly illuminates the world.
The Buddha’s field of merit is just like this,
for it dispels all darkness.
It is also like the clear full moon
which everywhere illuminates the great earth.
So too it is with the Buddha’s field of merit,
for it is impartial [toward everyone] everywhere.
It is analogous to the vairambha winds177
which everywhere shake the great earth.
The Buddha’s field of merit is just like this,
for it moves all beings in the three realms of existence.
It is analogous to the rising of a great conflagration
that is able to burn up all things.
The Buddha’s field of merit is just like this,
for it is able to burn up all that is conditioned.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Diligence
Bodhisattva,178 “Son of the Buddha, the teaching of the Buddha is sin­
gular. This being so, of the beings who are able to see him, why do
they not all immediately sever the bonds of all their afflictions and
thus succeed in gaining emancipation? Given that there are no differ­
ences in their respective form aggregates, feeling aggregates, percep­
tion aggregates, karmic formative factor aggregates, consciousness
aggregates, desire realms, form realms, formless realms, ignorance,
and desires, how is it that the Buddha’s teachings may benefit some
beings and yet have no benefit for others?”

306

The Flower Adornment Sutra
At that time, Foremost Diligence Bodhisattva responded with
verses, saying:
Son of the Buddha, please listen attentively
and I shall reply in accordance with what is true.
Some achieve liberation swiftly,
whereas others have difficulty achieving emancipation.
If one wishes to rid oneself
of the evil of countless transgressions,
one should become courageous and ever vigorous
in the Dharma of the Buddha.
Just as a merely feeble flame
will be quickly extinguished by wet firewood,
In the Dharma taught by the Buddha,
so too it is with those who are indolent.
Just as when one uses a drill in attempting to start a fire,
but repeatedly rests before flames emerge,
so that the fire’s strength therefore disappears,
so too it is with those who are indolent.
Just as when someone holding a sunlight-capturing gem
fails to use tinder to catch its radiance,
the fire then can never be started,
so too it is with those who are indolent.
Just as when, in the dazzling illumination of sunlight,
a young child might then shut his eyes
and then ask with astonishment, “Why can’t I see?,”
so too it is with those who are indolent.
It is just as if some person with neither hands nor feet
wished to use arrows made of Miscanthus reeds179
to break open the earth by everywhere shooting them into it.
So too it is with those who are indolent.
It is as if one were to attempt with the tip of a hair
to scoop up all the great ocean’s waters,
thus wishing to cause it to dry up.
So too it is with those who are indolent.
It is as if, once the kalpa-ending fires had already arisen,
one wished with only a little water to put them all out.
In the Dharma taught by the Buddha,
so too it is with those who are indolent.
It is as if, when gazing into space,
one were to sit up straight, remaining unmoving,

Chapter 10 — A Bodhisattva Asks for Clarification
307
and then claim he thereby soars up and travels through it.
So too it is with those who are indolent.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Dharma
Bodhisattva, “Son of the Buddha, according to what the Buddha has
said, wherever there are any beings who accept and uphold right
Dharma, they will all be able to cut off all the afflictions. Why then
is it that there are still those who accept and uphold right Dharma,
yet fail to cut them off, but rather instead follow along with greed,
hatred, and delusion and follow along with arrogance, concealment,
anger, enmity, jealousy, miserliness, deception, and flattery, even to
the point where they are turned around by their power and have no
resolve to abandon them? If they are able to accept and uphold the
Dharma, how is it that they still give rise to afflictions in their mental
actions?”
At that time, Foremost Dharma Bodhisattva responded with
verses, saying:
Son of the Buddha, please listen attentively
to the true meaning of what has been asked.
It is not solely on the basis of extensive learning
that one is able to enter the Tathāgata’s Dharma.
It is as if there were someone who was floating in the water
who, due to being terrified of drowning, then died of thirst.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.
It is as if someone were to prepare exquisite cuisine
and, even though hungry, still not eat.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.
It is as if someone were skilled in prescribing medicines,
yet remained unable to save himself from his own disease.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.
It is as if someone devoted himself to counting others’ jewels
even as he himself didn’t have half a penny to his name.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.
It is as if someone were born into the palace of a King
and yet experienced starvation and cold.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.

308

The Flower Adornment Sutra
It is as if someone who is deaf were to play music
for the pleasure of others even while failing to hear it himself.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.
It is as if someone who is blind were to paint many images
and show them to others without ever seeing them himself.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.
It is as if the captain of an ocean-going ship
were to meet his death out on the ocean.
Failing to cultivate the practice of the Dharma
even when very learned is just like this.
It is as if one were to stand at the crossroads,
extensively expounding on doing the many good deeds
even though he himself still has no genuine virtue.
Failing to practice is just like this.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Wisdom
Bodhisattva, “Son of the Buddha, within the Dharma of the Buddha,
it is wisdom that is considered to be foremost. Why then did the
Tathāgata, for the sake of beings, sometimes praise giving, sometimes
praise observing moral precepts, sometimes praise patience, some­
times praise vigor, sometimes praise dhyāna concentration, sometimes
praise wisdom, and also sometimes praise kindness, compassion,
sympathetic joy, or equanimity so that there was finally no single
Dharma by which one might realize anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi?”
At that time, Foremost Wisdom Bodhisattva responded with
verses, saying:
Son of the Buddha, you who are most rare
in your ability to know the minds of beings,
please listen closely to what I now say
in accordance with what the Worthy One has asked.
Of all the Master Guides throughout the eras
of the past, the future, and the present,
there are none who teach but a single dharma
by which one realizes the Path.
The Buddha knows the minds of beings
and thus realizes their particular natures each differ.
Hence he adapts to what is appropriate to the liberation of each
and thus teaches the Dharma in this way.
He praises giving for those who are miserly,
praises moral precepts for those given to breaking prohibitions,

Chapter 10 — A Bodhisattva Asks for Clarification
309
praises patience for those beset with much anger,
praises vigor for those fond of indolence,
praises dhyāna concentration for those with scattered minds,
praises wisdom for those who are deluded,
praises kindly sympathy for those who are not humane,
praises the great compassion for those given to rage and harming,
praises joyfulness for those inclined toward sorrow and distress,
and praises relinquishing for those with devious minds.
It is through such a sequential approach to cultivation
that one gradually perfects all dharmas of the Buddha.
Just as one first erects foundations
and only afterward constructs palaces or houses,
so too it is with giving and moral precepts,
the foundations of the bodhisattva’s many practices.
Just as one establishes city walls
to protect its population
so too it is with patience and vigor
which serve to protect the bodhisattvas.
Just as an immensely powerful king
is supported and admired by those in all the lands that he rules,
so too it is with meditative absorption and wisdom
upon which the bodhisattva relies.
Also, it is just as with the wheel-turning king
who is able to bestow every happiness.
So too it is with the four impartial minds180
which bestow happiness on the bodhisattvas.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva asked Foremost Worthy
Bodhisattva, “Son of the Buddha, it is by resort to but a single path
that all buddhas, the bhagavats, gained emancipation. Why then does
one now see that, in all buddha lands, there are many differences in
all their aspects? For instance, there are differences in each of their
worlds, their realms of beings, their teaching of Dharma, their train­
ing of others, their life spans, their radiance, their spiritual super­
knowledges, their congregations, their means of teaching, and the
duration of their Dharma. Even so, there are none of them who do
not perfect all dharmas of a buddha and realize anuttara-samyak-
saṃbodhi.”
At that time, Foremost Worthy Bodhisattva responded with verses,
saying:
Mañjuśrī, the Dharma is forever just so.
The Dharma Kings have but one Dharma.

310

The Flower Adornment Sutra
All of those who are free of obstacles
use one path to escape from saṃsāra.
The body of all buddhas
is but their one Dharma body.
They have one mind and one wisdom.
And, as for the powers and the fearlessness—these too are just so.
These accord with all their thoughts of dedication
established when they originally set out toward bodhi
by which they then acquired such kṣetra lands
and congregations as well as such ways of teaching the Dharma.
All the buddha kṣetras
are perfectly complete in all their adornments.
It is in accordance with differences in the practices of beings
that there are such differences in what they see.
The buddha kṣetra and the buddha body,
the congregations, and their discourses—
Dharmas of the buddhas such as these
are such that no beings would be able to see them.
Once their minds have already become purified
and their vows have all been completely fulfilled—
A person with penetrating clarity such as this
would then become capable of beholding this.
It is in accordance with the mental dispositions of beings
and the power inherent in the fruits of their karmic actions
that they see differences such as these.
This occurs because of the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers.
The buddha kṣetras are free of discriminations
and they have no dislikes and have no fondness,
They merely adapt to the minds of beings.
It is in this way that differences are perceived.
It is because of this that, in the world,
what each one sees is different.
It is not a matter of there being any mistake
on the part of any of the tathāgatas, the great rishis.
Within all worlds,
those who should receive instruction
always see the Hero Among Men.
The Dharma of all buddhas is just like this.
At that time, the bodhisattvas addressed Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva, say­
ing, “Son of the Buddha, now that we have each finished speaking of

Chapter 10 — A Bodhisattva Asks for Clarification
311
our understanding of these matters, we only wish that the Worthy
One will bring forth his marvelous eloquence and expound on all
of the Tathāgata’s spheres of action. What are the Buddha’s spheres
of action? What are the causes of the Buddha’s spheres of action?
What is it that the Buddha’s spheres of action liberate? What is it that
the Buddha’s spheres of action penetrate? What is it that constitutes
the wisdom of the Buddha’s spheres of action? What are the dhar­
mas associated with the Buddha’s spheres of action? What is it that
constitutes the discourse associated with the Buddha’s spheres of
action? What is it that constitutes the knowledge associated with the
Buddha’s spheres of action? What is it that constitutes the realiza­
tions associated with the Buddha’s spheres of action? What is it that
constitutes the manifestations of the Buddha’s spheres of action? And
what is it that constitutes the vastness of scope associated with the
Buddha’s spheres of action?
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva responded with verses, saying:
As for the Tathāgata’s profound sphere of action,
its capacity is equal to the realm of empty space.
All beings enter it
and yet, in truth, there is nothing at all that enters it.
As for the supremely marvelous causes
of the Tathāgata’s profound sphere of action,
even if one constantly expounded on them for a koṭī of kalpas,
one would still be unable to come to the end of them.
According with the minds of beings and their levels of wisdom,
then leading them to enter so all are caused to benefit—
Liberating beings in this way
is what comprises the sphere of action of all buddhas.
Entering and according with everyone
in all lands throughout all worlds,
the wisdom body is formless
and cannot be seen by others.
The buddhas’ sovereign wisdom
is unimpeded throughout the three periods of time.
A sphere of action possessed of wisdom such as this
is as impartial as empty space itself.
The Dharma realm and the realms of beings
ultimately are no different.
The complete knowing of absolutely everything—
This is the sphere of action of the Tathāgata.

312

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The Buddha’s wisdom is able to adapt to and comprehend
all of the voices
within all of the worlds,
and yet still has no discriminations about them.
This is not something consciousness can know,
nor is it a sphere of action fathomable through thought.
Its nature which is originally pure
is revealed to all the many sorts of beings.
It is not associated with either karma or afflictions.
It contains nothing and has no place where it dwells.
It has no illumination and no place it goes,
and it is impartial in its actions throughout the world.
The minds of all beings
everywhere throughout all three periods of time—
In but a single mind-moment, the Tathāgata
clearly comprehends them all.
At that time, within this Sahā world, all of all beings’ differences in
dharmas, differences in karmic actions, differences in worlds, dif­
ferences in bodies, differences in faculties, differences in the births
taken on, differences in karmic fruits of upholding moral precepts,
differences in karmic fruits of transgressing moral precepts, and dif­
ferences in the karmic fruits associated with their worlds—these all
became clearly revealed entirely through the spiritual powers of the
Buddha.
In this same way, entirely through the spiritual powers of the
Buddha, all of all beings’ differences in dharmas, and so forth up
to and including all the differences in the karmic fruits associated
with their worlds—these all became clearly manifested in the east
in all of the hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of worlds in
all the countless, measureless, boundless, incomparable, innumera­
ble, indescribable, inconceivable, incalculable, and ineffable numbers
of worlds extending to the very ends of the Dharma realm and the
realm of empty space. So too did this occur in the same way in the
south, the west, and the north, as well as in the four midpoints, above,
and below.
The End of Chapter Ten

Chapter 11
Pure Conduct
At that time, Foremost Wisdom Bodhisattva asked Mañjuśrī
Bodhisattva:
O Son of the Buddha, how does a bodhisattva attain faultless physi­
cal, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain harmless physi­
cal, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain blameless physi­
cal, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain indestructible
physical, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain irreversible
physical, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain unshakable
physical, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain extraordi­
narily superior physical, verbal, and mental karma? How does he
attain pure physical, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain
undefiled physical, verbal, and mental karma? How does he attain
physical, verbal, and mental karma guided by wisdom?
How does he attain fulfillment in place of birth, fulfillment in
lineage, fulfillment in clan, fulfillment in physical form, fulfillment
in physical features, fulfillment in thought, fulfillment in intelli­
gence, fulfillment in conduct, fulfillment in fearlessness, and ful­
fillment in awakening?
How does he attain supreme wisdom, foremost wisdom, the
most superior wisdom, the most supreme wisdom, measureless
wisdom, incalculable wisdom, inconceivable wisdom, incompara­
ble wisdom, immeasurable wisdom, and ineffable wisdom?
How does he attain causal power, the power of aspiration, the
power of skillful means, the power of conditions,181 the power of
objective conditions,182 the power of the roots,183 the power of con­
templation, the power of śamatha, the power of vipaśyanā, and the
power of reflection?184
How does he attain skillful means associated with the aggre­
gates, skillful means associated with the sense realms, skillful
means associated with the sense bases, skillful means associated
with conditioned arising, skillful means associated with the desire
realm, skillful means associated with the form realm, skillful
means associated with the formless realm, skillful means associ­
ated with the past, skillful means associated with the future, and
skillful means associated with the present?

314

The Flower Adornment Sutra
How does he attain skillful cultivation of the mindfulness
enlightenment factor, the dharma-selection enlightenment factor,
the vigor enlightenment factor, the joyfulness enlightenment factor,
the mental pliancy enlightenment factor, the concentration enlight­
enment factor, the equanimity enlightenment factor, and empti­
ness, signlessness, and wishlessness?185
How does he attain perfect fulfillment of the practice of dāna
pāramitā, śīla pāramitā, kṣānti pāramitā, vīrya pāramitā, dhyāna pāramitā,
and prajñā pāramitā186 while also perfectly fulfilling the practice of
kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity?187
How does he acquire: the wisdom power of knowing what can
and cannot be; the wisdom power of knowing the karmic retribu­
tions of the past, the future, and the present; the wisdom power of
knowing supremacy and inferiority of faculties; the wisdom power
of knowing the many different realms of beings; the wisdom power
of knowing the many different kinds of understanding; the wis­
dom power of knowing all the destinies to which all paths lead;
the wisdom power of knowing defilement and purity as associated
with the dhyānas, the liberations, and the samādhis; the wisdom
power of recalling past lives; the wisdom power of the unimpeded
heavenly eye; and the wisdom power of the severance of all karmic
propensities?188
How does he acquire the constant protection, reverence, and
offerings of the deva kings, the dragon kings, the yakṣa kings, the
gandharva kings, the asura kings, the garuḍa kings, the kiṃnara kings,
the mahoraga kings, the human kings, and the Brahma Heaven
kings?
How does he become for all beings: one upon whom they rely,
their rescuer, their refuge, their destiny, their torch, their light, their
illumination, their guide, their supreme guide, and their universal
guide?
How does he become, among all beings, the one who is foremost,
the one who is the greatest, the one who is supreme, the one who is
the most supreme, the one who is marvelous, the one who is ulti­
mately marvelous, the one who is superior, the one who is unsur­
passable, the one who is unequaled, and the one who is incompa­
rable?
At that time, Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva told Foremost Wisdom Bodhisattva:
Good indeed! O Son of the Buddha, it is because you now wish to
benefit the many, wish to provide the many with peace and secu­
rity, wish to take pity on the world, and wish to bring benefit and
happiness to both devas and humans that you have asked about the

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
315
meaning of matters such as these. Son of the Buddha, if bodhisat­
tvas use their minds skillfully:
They shall acquire every kind of supremely marvelous meritori­
ous quality;
Their minds will become unimpeded in the dharmas of all bud­
dhas;
They will abide in the path of all buddhas of the past, future, and
present;
They will dwell in accordance with beings and never forsake
them;
They will be able to possess a penetrating comprehension of all
things which accords with the true character of dharmas;
They will be able to cut off all evil and completely fulfill the many
varieties of goodness;
They will become like Samantabhadra and will be foremost in
physical appearance;
They will succeed in completely fulfilling all the practices and
vows;
They will have no dharma in which they do not acquire sovereign
mastery; and
They will become a second guide for beings.
Son of the Buddha, how should they use their minds that they will
then be able to acquire every kind of supremely marvelous meritori­
ous quality? Son of the Buddha:
When the bodhisattva abides in the home life
he should vow: “May all beings
realize that the home life is empty by nature
and avoid being subjected to its pressures.”
When engaged in filial service to his parents,
he should vow: “May all beings
skillfully serve the Buddha
and protect and nurture all beings.”
When together with wife and children,
he should vow: “May all beings
treat adversaries and intimates equally
and forever abandon desire-based attachments.”
When acquiring the objects of the five kinds of desire,
he should vow: “May all beings
pull out the arrow of desire
and acquire the ultimate peace and security.”

316

The Flower Adornment Sutra
When in the midst of social gatherings with musical entertainment,
he should vow: “May all beings
find their pleasure in the Dharma
and realize such entertainments are unreal.“
When in the palace or in one’s home,
he should vow: “May all beings
enter the grounds of the āryas
and rid themselves forever of defiling desires.”
When putting on the strand of beads,
he should vow: “May all beings
relinquish false adornments
and reach the station of genuine truth.”
When ascending a tower,
he should vow: “May all beings
ascend the tower of right Dharma
and develop a penetrating vision of everything.”
When he engages in an act of giving,
he should vow: “May all beings
become able to relinquish everything
and acquire minds entirely free of fond attachments.”
When gathering together with an assembly,
he should vow: “May all beings
relinquish the many accumulated dharmas
and realize all-knowledge.”
When in the midst of dangerous difficulties,
he should vow: “May all beings
gain sovereign mastery in whatever they wish for
and become unimpeded in whatever they practice.”
When relinquishing abiding in the home life,
he should vow: “May all beings
have no obstacles to leaving the home life
and have minds that become liberated.”
When entering a Sangha dwelling,
he should vow: “May all beings
expound on the many different topics
and be free of discord or contentiousness.”
When meeting with senior or junior teachers
he should vow: “May all beings
skillfully serve their teachers and elders
and practice good dharmas.”

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
317
When requesting to be allowed to leave the home life,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire the dharmas of irreversibility
and develop unimpeded minds.”
When shedding the clothing of the laity,
he should vow: “May all beings
diligently cultivate roots of goodness
and cast off the yoke of karmic transgressions.”
When shaving off the beard and hair,
he should vow: “May all beings
forever abandon the afflictions
and reach the ultimate quiescence.”
When donning the kaśāya robe,189
he should vow: “May all beings
have minds free of defilement
and perfect the path of the Great Rishi.”
When actually leaving the home life,
he should vow: “May all beings
leave the home life with the Buddha
and rescue all beings.”
When taking refuge in the Buddha,
he should vow: “May all beings
continue the lineage of the buddhas
and bring forth the unsurpassable resolve.”
When taking refuge in the Dharma,
he should vow: “May all beings
deeply enter the treasury of scriptures
and acquire wisdom as vast as the ocean.”
When taking refuge in the Sangha,
he should vow: “May all beings
unite in leading the great assembly
in which everyone is free of mutual obstructions.”
When taking on and training in the precepts,
he should vow: “May all beings
thoroughly study the moral precepts
and not commit any of the many sorts of evil deeds.”
When receiving teachings from an ācārya,190
he should vow: “May all beings
perfect the awesome deportment
and may their actions all be genuine.”

318

The Flower Adornment Sutra
When receiving the teaching of an upādhyāya,191
he should vow: “May all beings
enter the wisdom of the unproduced
and reach the station of independence.”
When taking the complete precepts,
he should vow: “May all beings
become equipped with all skillful means
and acquire the most supreme Dharma.”
When entering the hall,
he should vow: “May all beings
ascend to the unsurpassable hall
and peacefully abide in unshakable stillness.”
When spreading out his bed or seat,
he should vow: “May all beings
open and spread forth the good dharmas
and perceive the character of reality.”
When straightening the body and sitting erect,
he should vow: “May all beings
sit on the seat of bodhi
with minds free of attachments.”
When adopting the lotus posture in sitting,
he should vow: “May all beings
possess solid roots of goodness
and reach the ground of immovability.”
When cultivating meditative concentration,
he should vow: “May all beings
use concentration to subdue their minds
and ultimately reach [the nirvāṇa] without remainder.”
When cultivating meditative contemplation,
he should vow: “May all beings
see in accordance with true principles
and remain forever free of discord and contentiousness.”
When releasing his legs from the lotus posture,
he should vow: “May all beings
contemplate all the formative factor dharmas
as bound to return to disjunction and dissolution.”
Whenever he sets down his feet to stand up,
he should vow: “May all beings
have minds that achieve liberation
and stand securely in an immovable state.”

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
319
Whenever he lifts his foot,
he should vow: “May all beings
escape from the ocean of saṃsāra
and possess all the many good dharmas.”
When donning the lower robe,
he should vow: “May all beings
dress themselves in roots of goodness
and perfect the sense of shame and dread of blame.”
When straightening the robe and tying his belt,
he should vow: “May all beings
tie together their roots of goodness
and not allow them to become scattered or lost.”
When donning the upper robe,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire supreme roots of goodness
and reach the far shore of the Dharma.”
When donning the saṃghāṭī robe,192
he should vow: “May all beings
enter the supreme position
and realize the dharma of immovability.”
When his hand grasps the willow branch,193
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire the wondrous Dharma
and reach the state of ultimate purity.”
When chewing the willow branch,
he should vow: “May all beings
train and purify their minds
and bite through all afflictions.”
When defecating or urinating,
he should vow: “May all beings
expel greed, hatred, and delusion
and relieve themselves of the dharmas of karmic offenses.”
When finishing such matters and then going for the water,
he should vow: “May all beings
swiftly go forth
and enter the world-transcending dharmas.”
When rinsing himself clean of the body’s filth,
he should vow: “May all beings
become pure and harmonious
and ultimately free of defilements.”

320

The Flower Adornment Sutra
When using the water to wash his hands,
he should vow: “May all beings
have clean hands
with which to accept and retain the Dharma of the Buddha.”
When using water to wash his face,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire the Dharma gateways to purity
and become forever free of defilement.”
When grasping the tin-headed staff,194
he should vow: “May all beings
set up great assemblies dedicated to giving
and revealing the path that accords with reality.”
When holding the alms bowl,
he should vow: “May all beings
succeed in becoming vessels of Dharma
who receive the offerings of devas and humans.”
When setting out along a path,
he should vow: “May all beings
go forth on the path traveled by the Buddha
and enter the station of independence.”
When one is on a path,
he should vow: “May all beings
be able to practice the path of the Buddha
toward the dharma without residue.”195
When setting out on a road,
he should vow: “May all beings
walk in the pure Dharma realm
with minds free of obstacles.”
When seeing an ascending road,
he should vow: “May all beings
forever depart from the three realms
and have minds free of trepidation and weakness.”
When seeing a descending road,
he should vow: “May all beings
have minds that are humble and deferential
and grow the roots of goodness of a buddha.”
When seeing a crooked road,
he should vow: “May all beings
relinquish wrong paths
and forever rid themselves of evil views.”

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
321
When seeing a straight road,
he should vow: “May all beings
have minds that are correct and straight,
and become free of flattery and deception.”
When seeing a dusty road,
he should vow: “May all beings
become detached from the dusts196
and acquire the pure Dharma.”
When seeing a road free of dust,
he should vow: “May all beings
always practice the great compassion
and have minds that are radiantly friendly.”
When seeing a hazardous road,
he should vow: “May all beings
dwell in the realm of right Dharma
and abandon the karmic transgressions and difficulties.”197
When seeing an assembled congregation,
he should vow: “May all beings
discuss the extremely profound Dharma
and abide together in harmony.”
When seeing a large tree,198
he should vow: “May all beings
abandon selfish and contentious thought
and remain free of anger and hatred.”
When seeing a forest,
he should vow: “May all beings
become worthy of the reverence
of both devas and humans.”
When seeing a high mountain,
he should vow: “May all beings
possess roots of goodness which so surpass those of others
that no one will be able to reach their summit.”
When seeing thorn trees,
he should vow: “May all beings
swiftly succeed in cutting away
the thorns of the three poisons.”
When seeing trees with luxuriantly thriving foliage,
he should vow: “May all beings
become shaded by the liberation
achieved through meditative concentration.”

322

The Flower Adornment Sutra
When seeing the opening of a flower,
he should vow: “May all beings’
spiritual superknowledges and other such dharmas
blossom just like the flowers.”
When seeing blossoms on the trees,
he should vow: “May all beings
possess the many blossom-like signs
and possess all thirty-two marks.”199
When seeing fruit,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire the most supreme dharmas
and realize the path to bodhi.”
When seeing a great river,
he should vow: “May all beings
be able to enter the stream of the Dharma
and flow into the Buddha’s ocean of wisdom.”
When seeing lakes and marshes,
he should vow: “May all beings
swiftly awaken to the Buddha’s
Dharma of a single flavor.”200
When seeing a pond,
he should vow: “May all beings
completely fulfill their verbal karma
and become able to skillfully expound [on the Dharma].”
When seeing water being drawn from a well,
he should vow: “May all beings
accomplish the perfection of eloquence
and expound on all dharmas.”
When seeing a gushing spring,
he should vow: “May all beings
produce growth in their skillful means
and acquire inexhaustible roots of goodness.”
When seeing a road across a bridge,
he should vow: “May all beings
extensively liberate all beings,
thereby acting just like a bridge.”
When seeing flowing waters,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire wholesome aspirations
and wash away delusion’s defilements.”

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
323
When seeing cultivated gardens,
he should vow: “May all beings
extract the weeds of craving
from within the garden of the five kinds of desire.”
When seeing a grove of “sorrowless” trees,201
he should vow: “May all beings
forever abandon desire
and never be beset by sorrow or fear.”
When seeing a park,
he should vow: “May all beings
diligently cultivate all the practices
and progress toward the bodhi of the Buddha.”
When seeing someone adorned with ornaments,
he should vow: “May all beings
become well adorned
with the thirty-two marks.”
When seeing those free of any adornment,
he should vow: “May all beings
relinquish all adorning finery
and perfect the practice of the dhūta austerities.”202
When seeing those attached to pleasures,
he should vow: “May all beings
delight themselves with Dharma,
and enjoy it with such fondness that they never relinquish it.”
When seeing those free of attachment to pleasures
he should vow: “May all beings
have minds that find no pleasure
in conditioned phenomena.”
When seeing those who are happy,
he should vow: “May all beings
always acquire happiness
and delight in making offerings to the Buddha.”
When seeing those afflicted with suffering and anguish,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire the fundamental wisdom
by which they extinguish the many kinds of sufferings.”
When seeing those free of sickness,
he should vow: “May all beings
enter into genuine wisdom
and remain forever free of the anguish of sickness.”
When seeing those beset by sicknesses,
he should vow: “May all beings

324

The Flower Adornment Sutra
realize the emptiness and quiescence of the body
and abandon the dharmas of discord and contentiousness.”
When seeing those with an especially fine appearance,
he should vow: “May all beings
always develop pure faith
in the buddhas and bodhisattvas.”
When seeing those with an ugly appearance,
he should vow: “May all beings
refrain from delighting in and attaching to
engaging in unwholesome endeavors.”
When seeing beings who repay kindness,
he should vow: “May all beings
be able to appreciate the quality of kindness
of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.”
When seeing those who turn their backs on those who are kind,
he should vow: “May all beings
refrain from inflicting retribution
on those who have been evil.”
When seeing a śramaṇa
he should vow: “May all beings
become the most ultimately paramount
among those trained in pliancy and quiescence.203
When seeing a brahman,
he should vow: “May all beings
always uphold brahmacaryā204
and abandon all forms of evil.”
When seeing those who practice austerities,
he should vow: “May all beings
rely upon the practice of the austerities
and thus reach the ultimate stage of realization.”
When seeing those who practice virtuous conduct,
he should vow: “May all beings
remain steadfast in maintaining their resolve and practice
and never relinquish the path to buddhahood.”
When seeing those who are wearing armor,
he should vow: “May all beings
always carry the shield of goodness
and progress toward the Dharma that is not reliant on a teacher.”205
When seeing those without either armor or staves,
he should vow: “May all beings

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
325
forever depart from all
unwholesome karmic actions.”
When seeing those engaged in doctrinal discourse,
he should vow: “May all beings
become able to decisively vanquish
all proponents of deviant doctrines.”
When seeing those engaged in right livelihood,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire pure livelihoods
and not merely feign the awesome deportment.”
When seeing a king,
he should vow: “May all beings
become kings of the Dharma
and constantly turn the wheel of right Dharma.”
When seeing a son of a king,
he should vow: “May all beings
be born from the teaching of Dharma
and thereby become sons of the Buddha.”
When seeing elders,
he should vow: “May all beings
become well able to make clear judgments
and thus refrain from practicing evil dharmas.”
When seeing great officials,
he should vow: “May all beings
constantly preserve right mindfulness
and practice the many varieties of goodness.”
When seeing city walls and outlying precincts,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire bodies which are strong
and minds which are free of deviousness.”
When seeing a king’s capital city,
he should vow: “May all beings
join together in the accumulation of meritorious qualities
and have minds constantly filled with joyous delight.”
When seeing those who reside in forests or jungles,
he should vow: “May all beings
become those who are worthy
of being praised and respected by devas and humans.”
When entering the village to seek alms food,
he should vow: “May all beings

326

The Flower Adornment Sutra
enter into the profound Dharma realm
with minds that are free of obstacles.”
When arriving at people’s gates,
he should vow: “May all beings
enter all the gateways
of the Dharma of the Buddha.”
When he has already entered someone’s house,
he should vow: “May all beings
succeed in entering the buddha vehicle,
which is the same in all three periods of time.”
When seeing those who do not give,
he should vow: “May all beings
never relinquish
the dharmas of the supreme meritorious qualities.”
When seeing those who are able to give,
he should vow: “May all beings
become forever able to abandon
the sufferings of the three wretched destinies.”
When seeing an empty bowl,
he should vow: “May all beings
have minds that are pure
and empty of all the afflictions.”
When seeing a bowl that is full,
he should vow: “May all beings
completely fulfill
all of the good dharmas.”
When receiving reverence from others,
he should vow: “May all beings
reverently cultivate
all the dharmas of the Buddha.”
When one does not receive reverence from others,
he should vow: “May all beings
refrain from practicing
any of the unwholesome dharmas.”
When seeing someone possessed of a sense of shame,
he should vow: “May all beings
be possessed of actions imbued with a sense of shame
and see that they guard the sense faculties.”
When seeing someone who has no sense of shame,
he should vow: “May all beings

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
327
abandon shamelessness
and dwell in the path of great kindness.”
When obtaining fine food,
he should vow: “May all beings
completely fulfill their vows
and have minds free of covetous desires.”
When obtaining food that is not fine,
he should vow: “May no being
fail to acquire
the flavor of all the samādhis.”
When receiving soft foods,
he should vow: “May all beings
become imbued with the great compassion
and have minds that are gentle.”
When obtaining coarse and rough foods,
he should vow: “May all beings
have minds free of defiling attachments
that cut off worldly cravings.”
When eating,
he should vow: “May all beings
take the bliss of dhyāna as their food
and be filled with joy in the Dharma.”
When tasting flavors,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire the supreme flavor of buddhahood
and become completely filled with the elixir of immortality.”206
When he has finished the meal,
he should vow: “May all beings
successfully accomplish all their endeavors
and perfect all dharmas of the Buddha.”
When teaching the Dharma,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire endless eloquence
and widely proclaim the essentials of the Dharma.”
When emerging from a house,
he should vow: “May all beings
deeply enter the wisdom of the Buddha
and forever transcend the three realms of existence.”
When one enters the water,
he should vow: “May all beings

328

The Flower Adornment Sutra
penetrate all-knowledge
and understand the equality of the three periods of time.”207
When bathing the body,
he should vow: “May all beings
become free of defilement of either body or mind
and become radiantly immaculate both within and without.”
When exposed to the burning intensity of extreme summer heat,
he should vow: “May all beings
abandon the many kinds of afflictions
and bring them all to an end.”
When the summer heat recedes and the coolness begins,
he should vow: “May all beings
realize the unsurpassed Dharma
and attain the ultimate clarity and coolness.”
When reciting scriptures,
he should vow: “May all beings
accord with the instructions of the Buddha,
comprehensively retain them, and never forget them.”
If he succeeds in seeing the Buddha,
he should vow: “May all beings
acquire unimpeded vision
and thereby see all buddhas.”
When closely contemplating the Buddha,
he should vow: “May all beings
become like Samantabhadra,
with a fine and well-adorned appearance.”
When seeing a Buddha stupa,
he should vow: “May all beings
become as revered as a stupa
and receive the offerings of devas and humans.”
When reverently contemplating a stupa,
he should vow: “May all beings
become admired and looked up to
by both devas and humans.”
When bowing down in reverence before a stupa,
he should vow: “May all beings become
those for whom none of the devas or humans
are able to see the tops of their heads.”208
When circumambulating the stupa in a rightward direction,209
he should vow: “May all beings

Chapter 11 — Pure Conduct
329
remain free of actions contrary [to the Dharma]
and achieve the realization of all-knowledge.”
When thrice circumambulating the stupa,
he should vow: “May all beings
diligently cultivate the path to buddhahood
with minds that remain free of indolence.”
When praising the Buddha’s meritorious qualities,
he should vow: “May all beings
come to completely possess all the meritorious qualities
and thus become endlessly praised.”
When praising the Buddha’s signs and characteristics,
he should vow: “May all beings
perfect the body of a buddha
and realize the dharma of signlessness.”
When washing his feet,
he should vow: “May all beings
become equipped with ability to travel by spiritual power210
and become unimpeded wherever they go.”
When going to sleep at the appropriate time,
he should vow: “May the bodies of all beings
become peaceful and secure
and may their minds remain unmoved and undisturbed.”
When first awakening from sleep,
he should vow: “May all beings
awaken to all-knowledge
and be able to see throughout the ten directions.”
Sons of the Buddha, if bodhisattvas use their minds in this way,
then they will acquire every kind of supremely marvelous meritori­
ous quality and [their minds] will become such that they cannot be
shaken by any of the worlds’ devas, māras, brahmans, gandharvas,
asuras, and such, or by any of the śrāvaka disciples or pratyekabud­
dhas.
The End of Chapter Eleven

330

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 12
Foremost Worthy
At that time, when Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva had finished speaking of
the great meritorious qualities of pure conduct free of turbidity and
confusion, because he wished to reveal the meritorious qualities
of the resolve to attain bodhi, he used a verse to make a request of
Foremost Worthy Bodhisattva, saying:
For the benefit of the bodhisattvas, I have now already
spoken of the Buddha’s past cultivation of pure conduct.
In the midst of this congregation, the Worthy One should also
freely expound on the supreme meritorious qualities of cultivation.
Foremost Worthy Bodhisattva then replied in verses, saying:
This is good indeed. May the Worthy Ones listen closely.
Those meritorious qualities are immeasurable.
As befits my powers, I shall now describe only a small portion
comparable to but a single drop of water from an ocean.
Whenever a bodhisattva first makes the resolve
by which he vows to seek and realize the bodhi of a buddha,
the meritorious qualities he acquires are boundless,
immeasurable, and incomparable.
How much the more so when, for countless and boundless kalpas,
he fully cultivates the qualities of the grounds and the perfections.
Even if all tathāgatas of the ten directions
joined in praising this, they could never reach the end of it.
I shall now describe but a small portion among
such boundlessly great meritorious qualities as these,
comparable only to the tracks left in the sky by a bird
or to but a single mote of dust compared to the great earth.
When the bodhisattva arouses the will to seek bodhi,
this is not something without causes and without conditions.
Developing pure faith in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha—
It is due to this that he produces the vast resolve.
He does not seek the five desires, the position of a king,
wealth, personal pleasure, or great fame.
It is solely in order to forever extinguish beings’ sufferings
and benefit those in the world that he makes this resolve.

332

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He always aspires to benefit beings and make them happy,
to adorn the lands, to make offerings to the buddhas,
to take on and uphold right Dharma, and to cultivate wisdom.
It is to realize bodhi that he makes this resolve.
With profound intentions, resolute faith, and constant purity,
he reverently honors and esteems all buddhas
as well as, in the same way, the Dharma and the Sangha.
With utmost sincerity, he makes offerings and makes this resolve.
He has deep faith in the Buddha and the Buddha’s Dharma,
also has faith in the path practiced by the sons of the Buddha,
and he has faith, too, in the unexcelled great bodhi.
It is because of this that the bodhisattva makes the initial resolve.
Faith is the source of the path and the mother of meritorious qualities.
It brings about the growth and nourishment of all good dharmas,
cuts away the net of doubts, enables escape from the river of cravings,
and reveals the unsurpassed path to nirvāṇa.
When faith is free of defilement and turbidity, the mind becomes pure.
It extinguishes arrogance and constitutes the root of reverence.
It is also the foremost form of wealth in the treasury of Dharma
and the pure hands with which one takes on the many practices.
It is due to faith that one gives with kindness free of miserliness.
Due to faith, one is able to joyfully enter the Buddha’s Dharma.
Due to faith, one is able to increase wisdom and meritorious qualities.
Due to faith, one is able to certainly reach the ground of the Tathāgata.
Faith enables the faculties to become pure, bright, and sharp.
Solid power of faith is indestructible.
Faith enables one to forever destroy the roots of the afflictions.
Faith enables one to progress especially toward a buddha’s qualities.211
Through faith, one remains free of attachment to the sense realms,
leaves the difficulties far behind, and becomes free of the difficulties.212
Faith enables one to step beyond the paths of the many māras
and reveals the path to the unsurpassed liberation.
Faith is the indestructible seed of meritorious qualities.
Faith enables the growth of one’s tree of bodhi.
Faith enables the growth of the most supreme wisdom.
Faith is able to reveal all buddhas.
Therefore, to speak of the sequence in relying on the practices,
faithful aspiration is the most supreme and extremely rare.
It is analogous to having in all worlds
a marvelous wish-fulfilling jewel.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
333
If one always has faith as one serves the buddhas,
one is able to uphold the precepts and cultivate the bases of training.
If one always upholds the precepts and cultivates the bases of training,
then one is able to completely fulfill all the meritorious qualities.
Precepts are able to develop the roots of bodhi.
Training is the ground for diligent cultivation of meritorious qualities.
Whoever always follows the practice of both precepts and training
is praised by all tathāgatas.
If one always has faith as one serves the buddhas,
then he is able to gather together great offerings.
If one is able to gather together great offerings,
then such a person’s faith in the Buddha becomes inconceivably great.
If one always has faith as one serves the venerable Dharma,
then one becomes insatiable in listening to the Buddha’s Dharma.
If one becomes insatiable in listening to the Buddha’s Dharma,
then such a person’s faith in the Dharma grows inconceivably great.
If one always has faith in the pure Sangha,
then one acquires irreversible faith.
If one acquires irreversible faith,
then such a person’s power of faith becomes unshakable.
If one acquires unshakable power of faith,
then one acquires purity, radiance, and acuity of all faculties.
If one acquires purity, radiance, and acuity of all faculties,
then one is able to avoid bad spiritual guides.
If one is able to avoid bad spiritual guides,
then one becomes able to draw close to good spiritual guides.
If one is able to draw close to good spiritual guides,
then one is able to cultivate and accumulate great goodness.
If one is able to cultivate and accumulate great goodness,
then one becomes able to perfect great causal power.
If one becomes able to perfect great causal power,
then one acquires especially supreme and decisive understanding.
If one acquires especially supreme and decisive understanding,
then one becomes protected and borne in mind by the buddhas.
If one becomes protected and borne in mind by the buddhas,
then one becomes able to arouse the resolve to attain bodhi.
If one becomes able to arouse the resolve to attain bodhi,
then one is able to diligently cultivate the Buddha’s qualities.
If one is able to diligently cultivate the Buddha’s qualities,
then one succeeds in being born into the clan of the tathāgatas.

334

The Flower Adornment Sutra
If one succeeds in being born into the clan of the tathāgatas,
then one cultivates well skillful expedient means.
If one cultivates well skillful expedient means,
then one acquires faithful aspiration that is pure.
If one acquires faithful aspiration that is pure,
then one is able to develop an ever more supreme resolve.
If one is able to develop an ever more supreme resolve,
then one forever cultivates the pāramitās.
If one forever cultivates the pāramitās,
then one is able to completely fulfill [the practice of] the Mahāyāna.
If one is able to completely fulfill [the practice of] the Mahāyāna,
then one is able to make offerings to the Buddha according to Dharma.
If one is able to make offerings to the Buddha according to Dharma,
then one is able with unwavering mind to be mindful of the Buddha.
If one is able with unwavering mind to be mindful of the Buddha,
then one will always see countless buddhas.
If one always sees countless buddhas,
then one will see that the essence of the Tathāgata abides forever.213
If one sees that the essence of the Tathāgata abides forever,
then one is able to realize that the Dharma is never destroyed.
If one is able to realize that the Dharma is never destroyed,
then one acquires unimpeded eloquence.
If one acquires unimpeded eloquence,
one is able to expound on infinitely many dharmas.
If one is able to expound on infinitely many dharmas,
then one becomes able to liberate beings with kindness and sympathy.
If one becomes able to liberate beings with kindness and sympathy,
then one attains a solid mind of great compassion.
If one attains a solid mind of great compassion,
then one is able to love the extremely profound Dharma.
If one is able to love the extremely profound Dharma,
then one is able to abandon the faults of conditioned existence.
If one is able to abandon the faults of conditioned existence,
then one leaves behind arrogance and neglectfulness.
If one leaves behind arrogance and neglectfulness,
then one becomes able to also benefit everyone else.
If one becomes able to also benefit everyone else,
then one dwells in saṃsāra without becoming weary of it.
If one dwells in saṃsāra without becoming weary of it,
then one is able to become an invincibly valiant stalwart.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
335
If one is able to become an invincibly valiant stalwart,
then one becomes able to generate great spiritual superknowledges.
If one becomes able to generate great spiritual superknowledges,
then one knows the actions of all beings.
If one knows the actions of all beings,
then one can enable the complete development of the many beings.
If one can enable the complete development of the many beings,
then one acquires the wisdom that skillfully attracts beings.
If one acquires the wisdom that skillfully attracts beings,
then one is able to perfect the four means of attraction.
If one is able to perfect the four means of attraction,
then one is able to provide limitless benefit to beings.
If one is able to provide limitless benefit to beings,
then one perfects the most supremely wise skillful means.
If one perfects the most supremely wise skillful means,
then one abides in the courageous and unexcelled path.
If one abides in the courageous and unexcelled path,
then one is able to demolish the power of all māras.
If one is able to demolish the power of all māras,
then one is able to step beyond the realms of the four māras.214
If one is able to step beyond the realms of the four māras,
then one succeeds in reaching the ground of irreversibility.
If one succeeds in reaching the ground of irreversibility,
then one is able to gain the deep unproduced-dharmas’ patience.
If one is able to gain the deep unproduced-dharmas patience,
then one receives the prediction bestowed by all buddhas.
If one receives the prediction bestowed by all buddhas,
then all buddhas appear directly before one.
If all buddhas appear directly before one,
then one fully understands the deeply secret uses of spiritual powers.
If one fully understands the deeply secret uses of spiritual powers,
then one is borne in mind by all buddhas.
If one is borne in mind by all buddhas,
then one becomes adorned with the qualities of the Buddha.
If one becomes adorned with the qualities of the Buddha,
then one acquires the majestic body possessed of marvelous merit.215
If one gains the majestic body possessed of marvelous merit,
then one’s body shines with dazzling light like a mountain of gold.
If one’s body shines with dazzling light like a mountain of gold,
then one acquires the adornment of the thirty-two marks.

336

The Flower Adornment Sutra
If one acquires the adornment of the thirty-two marks,
then one gains the fine subsidiary signs as one’s adornments.
If one gains the fine subsidiary signs as one’s adornments,
then the light emanated by one’s body is limitless.
If the light emanated by one’s body is limitless,
then one becomes adorned with inconceivable radiance.
If one becomes adorned with inconceivable radiance,
one’s light then emanates lotus flowers.
If one’s light emanates lotus flowers,
then countless buddhas appear, sitting atop the flowers,
manifesting throughout all ten directions without exception,
with all of them able to train all beings.
If one is able to train all beings in this way,
one manifests the power of measureless spiritual superknowledges.
If one manifests the power of measureless spiritual superknowledges,
then one dwells in inconceivably many lands,
expounding on the inconceivable Dharma,
causing joyous delight in inconceivably many beings.
If one expounds on the inconceivable Dharma,
causing joyous delight in inconceivably many beings,
then one uses the power of wisdom and eloquence
to adapt to beings’ minds and thus teach and guide them forth.
If one uses the power of wisdom and eloquence
to adapt to beings’ minds and thus teach and guide them forth,
then one takes wisdom as one’s guide
and one is forever free of error in deeds of body, mouth, and mind.
If one takes wisdom as one’s guide
and one is forever free of error in deeds of body, mouth, and mind,
then one achieves sovereign mastery in one’s power of vows
and everywhere adapts to the various destinies, manifesting bodies.
If one achieves sovereign mastery in one’s power of vows
and everywhere adapts to the various destinies, manifesting bodies,
then one is able when speaking Dharma for the multitude
to be inconceivably skillful in making his language adapt to each type.
If one is able when speaking Dharma for the multitude
to be inconceivably skillful in making his language adapt to each type,
then one is able in but a single mind-moment
to completely know the thoughts of all beings without exception.
If one is able in but a single mind-moment
to completely know the thoughts of all beings without exception,

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
337
then one realizes the afflictions have no place from which they arise
and thus never again sinks and drowns within saṃsāra.
If one realizes the afflictions have no place from which they arise
and thus never again sinks and drowns within saṃsāra,
then one acquires the Dharma-nature body possessed of the qualities.
and manifests in the world through Dharma’s awesome power.
If one acquires the Dharma nature body possessed of the qualities
and manifests in the world through Dharma’s awesome power,
then one acquires the ten grounds and ten types of sovereign mastery
and cultivates the perfections and the supreme liberations.
If one acquires the ten grounds and ten types of sovereign mastery
and cultivates the perfections and the supreme liberations,
then one gains the anointing of the crown and great superknowledges
and abides in the most supreme samādhis.
If one gains the anointing of the crown and great superknowledges
and abides in the most supreme samādhis,
then, in the presence of all buddhas of the ten directions,
one receives the anointing of the crown and ascends to that position.216
If in the presence of all buddhas of the ten directions,
one receives the anointing of the crown and ascends to that position,
then he experiences the hands of all buddhas of the ten directions
anointing the crown of his head with the elixir of immortality.
If one experiences the hands of all buddhas of the ten directions
anointing the crown of his head with the elixir of immortality,
then his body pervades all places like empty space,
and he abides peacefully, unmoving, filling the ten directions.
If his body pervades all places like empty space,
and he abides peacefully, unmoving, filling the ten directions,
then his sphere of action is beyond compare
and unknowable by any deva or person of the world.
The bodhisattva diligently cultivates the practice of great compassion
and vows to liberate all beings so that no one fails to gain the fruits.217
If anyone sees, hears, listens, accepts, or makes an offering,
none fail to thus be caused to attain happiness.
Those great eminences’ awesome spiritual powers and
Dharma eyes are always complete, free of defect, and undiminishing.
The ten good deeds, the sublime practices, and other path aspects—
They cause all these unsurpassably supreme jewels to appear.
In this, they are analogous to the great ocean’s mass of vajra
that, due to its awesome power, gives birth to the many gems

338

The Flower Adornment Sutra
while neither diminishing, increasing, or ever coming to an end.
The bodhisattva’s accumulation of meritorious qualities is also just so.
Where there are kṣetras with no buddhas,
they manifest the realization of right enlightenment there.
Where there are lands where beings are unaware of the Dharma,
they proclaim the treasury of wondrous Dharma for their sakes.
They are free of discriminations and free of all effortful endeavors
even as, in a single mind-moment, they pervade the ten directions
just as moonlight’s shining has no place it fails to completely reach.
Just so, they use countless skillful means to teach the many beings.
Throughout those worlds of the ten directions,
they appear in every mind-moment, achieving buddhahood,
turning the wheel of right Dharma, entering nirvāṇa, and so forth,
concluding with the wide-spread distribution of their śarīra.
They may manifest as on the śrāvaka-disciple or pratyekabuddha paths
or manifest as achieving buddhahood with its pervasive adornments,
thus revealing and explaining the teaching of the Three Vehicles
as they extensively liberate beings for countless kalpas.
Sometimes, they appear in the form of chaste youths or maidens,
or as devas, dragons, asuras,
and so forth, including as mahoragas and such,
adapting to their preferences, thus allowing all to behold them.
The forms and appearances of beings are each different.
Their karma actions and their languages are also countless.
They are able to appear in ways conforming to all such beings as these
with the awesome spiritual power of the oceanic imprint samādhi.
They purify inconceivably many kṣetras
and make offerings to all the tathāgatas.
They emanate great and boundless radiance
and the beings they liberate are also limitlessly numerous.
With inconceivable wisdom and sovereign mastery,
they are unimpeded in the phrasings used in speaking Dharma.
In giving, moral virtue, patience, vigor, dhyāna absorption,
wisdom, skillful means, spiritual superknowledges, and such—
They possess sovereign mastery in all practices such as these
through the power of the Buddha’s flower adornment samādhi.
They enter samādhi within but a single atom
and perfect meditative absorption within all atoms,
and yet those atoms still do not increase in size, even as,
in each one of them, there appear inconceivably many kṣetras.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
339
In the many kṣetras present inside of each of those atoms,
some contain buddhas, whereas in others, there are no buddhas.
Some are defiled, whereas others are pure,
and some are vast and large while others are narrow and small.
Some are being created, whereas others are being destroyed.
Some of them are upright, while others are turned sideways.
Some resemble hot-season mirages in a vast wilderness,
whereas others are like the net of Indra in the heavens.
What appears as manifest in any single atom
likewise appears in the same way in all other atoms.
This occurs as a consequence of these greatly famous āryas’
powers of samādhis, liberations, and the spiritual superknowledges.
If they wish to make offerings to all buddhas,
they enter samādhi and bring forth spiritual transformations
enabling one hand to reach throughout the entire trichiliocosm,
everywhere making offerings to all the tathāgatas.
All the supremely marvelous flowers from all the ten directions,
perfumed lotions, powdered incenses, and priceless jewels—
All sorts of gifts such as these come forth from their hands
as offerings to the Most Supreme Ones beneath their bodhi trees.
Robes adorned with priceless gems, various kinds of fine incense,
Jeweled banners, pennants, and canopies, all nicely adorned,
flowers made of real gold, and curtains made of jewels—
None of these do not come forth and rain down from their palms.
All the marvelous things from throughout the ten directions
that are suitable to offer up to the unexcelled bhagavats—
they all rain down from their palms, none not in abundance,
then are held up as offerings to the buddhas before their bodhi trees.
All types of musical performances from throughout the ten directions,
including bells, drums, zithers, and zitherns, none of but a single sort,
are all played in refined harmonies together with wondrous voices.
None of these do not come forth from within their palms.
All of the praise verses from throughout the ten directions,
extolling the tathāgatas’ genuine meritorious qualities—
All different sorts of marvelous phrasings such as these
are all intoned from within their palms.
The right hands of those bodhisattvas emanate pure light.
From amidst that light, perfumed waters rain down from the sky,
everywhere sprinkling the lands of the buddhas of the ten directions
as offerings to all those Lamps Who Illuminate the Worlds.

340

The Flower Adornment Sutra
They also emanate marvelously adorned light
that sends forth countless jeweled lotus flowers.
In their color and appearance, the flowers are all especially marvelous.
It is with these that they make offerings to the buddhas.
They also emanate light that is adorned with flowers
from which all kinds of marvelous flowers join together into curtains
that everywhere spread out to the lands of the ten directions
as offerings to all the greatly virtuous ones, the bhagavats.
They also emanate light adorned with incense
from which all kinds of marvelous incense join together into curtains
that everywhere spread out to the lands of the ten directions
as offerings to all the greatly virtuous ones, the bhagavats.
They also emanate light adorned with types of powdered incense
from which all kinds of powdered incense join together into curtains
that everywhere spread out to the lands of the ten directions
as offerings to all the greatly virtuous ones, the bhagavats.
They also emanate light adorned with robes
from which all kinds of fine robes join together into curtains
that everywhere spread out to the lands of the ten directions
as offerings to all the greatly virtuous ones, the bhagavats.
They also emanate light adorned with jewels
from which all kinds of marvelous jewels join together into curtains
that everywhere spread out to the lands of the ten directions
as offerings to all the greatly virtuous ones, the bhagavats.
They also emanate light adorned with lotuses
from which all kinds of lotus flowers join together into curtains
that everywhere spread out to the lands of the ten directions
as offerings to all the greatly virtuous ones, the bhagavats.
They also emanate light adorned with jewel garlands
from which all kinds of marvelous garlands join together into curtains
that everywhere spread out to the lands of the ten directions
as offerings to all the greatly virtuous ones, the bhagavats.
They also emanate light adorned with banners.
Those banners are beautiful, dazzling, replete with many colors,
and of countless different kinds, all of which are especially fine.
They use these as adornments in all lands of the buddhas.
Many different kinds of the various jewels form adorning canopies,
from which hang many marvelous silken decorative pennants
and maṇi jewel bells ringing forth the sounds of the buddhas.
All of these are held forth as offerings to all the tathāgatas.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
341
Their hands send forth inconceivable offering gifts.
Just as they make offerings in this way to a single Master Guide,
so too do they do so in the same way wherever all buddhas dwell
through the samādhis and spiritual powers of these great eminences.
As the bodhisattvas abide in samādhi,
they use many different kinds of sovereign mastery to attract beings,
in all cases using the dharmas of meritorious qualities they practice
along with countless skillful means to guide and gather them in.
They may use the gateway of making offerings to the tathāgatas,
or may use the gateway of inconceivable sorts of giving,
or may use the gateway of dhūta austerities and moral precepts,
or may use the gateway of unshakable patience,
or may use the gateway of vigor in the practice of austerities,
or may use the gateway of quiescent dhyāna absorption,
or may use the gateway of decisively understanding wisdom,
or may use the gateway of the expedients they practice,
or may use the gateway of the brahma vihāras218 and spiritual powers,
or may use the gateway of the four means of attraction’s benefits,
or may use the gateway of adornment with merit and wisdom,
or may use the gateway of liberation by causes and conditions,
or may use the gateway of the roots, the powers, and the right path,219
or may use the gateway of the śrāvaka disciple’s liberations,
or may use the gateway of the pratyekabuddha’s purification,
or may use the gateway of the Great Vehicle’s sovereign masteries,
or may use the gateway of the many sufferings of impermanence,
or may use the gateway of nonexistence of self or one with a life span,
or may use the gateway of abandoning desire through unloveliness,220
or may use the gateway of the complete-cessation samādhi.
In accordance with the different illnesses of beings,
they in all cases use the medicine of Dharma to counteract them.
In accordance with the mental dispositions of beings,
they in all cases use skillful means, thus thoroughly satisfying them.
In accordance with the differences in the behaviors of beings,
they in all cases use skillful means to enable their development.
Such aspects of samādhi and spiritual superknowledges as these
are such that no deva or human could ever fathom them.
There is a marvelous samādhi known as “adapted to preferences.”
Bodhisattvas abiding in it engage in a universal contemplation
by which, adapting to what is fitting, they manifest to liberate beings,
thus enabling them all to happily follow the Dharma teachings.

342

The Flower Adornment Sutra
During the course of the kalpa, in seasons of famine and disaster,
they always provide those in the world with whatever pleases them,
adapting to whatever they desire and causing them all to be satisfied,
thus creating benefit for all beings.
Sometimes they provide food and drink of supremely fine flavor,
bejeweled robes, adornments, the many kinds of marvelous things,
and so forth, even being able to give up their positions as kings,
thus causing those pleased by such giving to follow the teachings.
Sometimes they use a body adorned with the marks and signs
that is dressed in supremely marvelous robes and jewel garlands.
Using this body graced with floral chaplets, anointed with perfumes,
and perfect in the awesome deportment, they liberate beings.
With a physical appearance, countenance, and robes
that everyone in the world will admire and esteem,
adapting appropriately, appearing everywhere, pleasing their minds,
they enable all those fond of physical appearance to follow the path.
Using the exquisitely marvelous sounds of the kalaviṅka bird
and the marvelous voicings of the kokila bird and others,
all of which are replete with various sorts of pure sounds,
they adapt to beings’ mental dispositions and speak Dharma for them.
There are eighty-four thousand Dharma gateways.
All buddhas use these to liberate beings.
They also use different dharmas that accord with them,
adapting to whatever suits the world as they teach and liberate beings.
In beings’ pain and pleasure, gain and loss, and so forth,221
and in all dharmas in which all those in the world engage,
they are able to respond and appear, joining them in their endeavors,
thus everywhere liberating beings by these means.
The many sufferings and troubles of those in all worlds
are as deep and boundlessly vast as the great ocean.
They join them in their endeavors, always being able to be patient,
thus enabling them to benefit and thus gain happiness.
Where there are those who do not know the dharmas of emancipation
and do not seek liberation and separation from chaotic confusion,
bodhisattvas appear for them, relinquishing the throne and wealth,
and always wishing to leave the home life and gain mental quiescence.
The household is the place in which one is bound up by desires.
Wishing to enable all beings to entirely avoid this,
they therefore show how to leave the home life and gain liberation
through having none of the types of desire that they deign to adopt.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
343
The bodhisattvas show them how to practice ten types of actions222
and also how to practice all the dharmas of great men
as well as all without exception of the practices of rishis and others,
doing so because they wish to benefit beings.
Wherever there are beings with measureless life spans
in whom afflictions are only subtle and who enjoy complete bliss,
the bodhisattvas, having achieved sovereign mastery over them,
reveal the many disastrous aspects of aging, sickness, and death.
Where there are those beset by greed, hatred, and delusion
who are ever ablaze with the fierce flames of the afflictions,
the bodhisattvas reveal for them aging, sickness, and death,
thus enabling those beings to all take up the training.
The Tathāgatas’ ten powers, fearlessnesses,
eighteen exclusive dharmas,
and all their countless meritorious qualities
are all manifested to bring about the liberation of beings.
Predictions, remonstrances, as well as travel by spiritual power223—
All of these are freely used by the tathāgatas.
All of those great eminences reveal them all,
thus becoming able to cause all beings to take on the training.
The bodhisattvas use all kinds of different expedient gateways
adapted to the dharmas of the world as means to liberate beings.
Just as the lotus flower is not attached to the waters,
so too do they reside in the world, inspiring deep faith.
Using the refined thought and deep talents of the kings of literati,
using song, dance, and discussions pleasing the many,
and using the many forms of worldly arts and skills,
they are like master conjurers with nothing they do not manifest.
They may become elders serving as leaders in villages,
may become guides who lead merchants and businessmen,
may become kings of countries or great officials,
or may become fine physicians or those skilled in many doctrines.
They may appear as large trees in the midst of a vast plain,
may become fine medicine or a trove of many jewels,
may become precious wish-fulfilling gems,
or may show the right path to beings.224
If they observe a world that is but newly established
in which beings do not yet have life-sustaining tools,
the bodhisattvas will become skilled artisans in these times
in order to manifest all kinds of different trades for them.

344

The Flower Adornment Sutra
They do not invent things that may serve to torment beings,
but rather only speak of endeavors benefiting the world.
As for the many teachings on mantra techniques, medicines, and such,
they are able to provide instruction on all matters such as these.
The extraordinary practices of all the rishis
inspiring faith and admiration in all humans, devas, and others—
As appropriate, these bodhisattvas are freely able to perform
all such difficult-to-practice dharmas related to the austerities.
They may become renouncers of the home life from other traditions,
may abide in mountains and forests, diligent in solitary asceticism,
or may become naked ascetics who have no clothes,
thus serving within those groups as teachers and elders.
They may appear as engaged in various practices of wrong-livelihood,
becoming supreme in the practice of what is not Dharma.
They may manifest all types of awesome deportment of brahmacārins
and thus become supreme leaders within those congregations.
They may endure the fivefold heat225 or always turn to face the sun,
may observe prohibitions by which they emulate cows, dogs, or deer,
or may wear ruined robes and practice fire worship,
doing so to become guiding teachers teaching people such as these.
They may manifest as paying respects at temples of deities
or may manifest as entering the waters of the Ganges River,
as eating roots and fruits and such, displaying all such practices,
even as they are always contemplating their own supreme Dharma.226
They may appear as cultivating squatting or standing on one foot,227
may appear lying down on beds of thorns or embers,
or may appear lying down on beds of spikes, seeking emancipation,
thus becoming the head teachers among those groups.
With all such types of non-Buddhist traditions as these,
they assess their understanding, join them in the same endeavors,
and then display austerities none in the world could endure,
thus causing them all to submit to their training after witnessing this.
Being confused and deluded, beings accept erroneous teachings,
abide in evil views, and undergo manifold sufferings.
They create expedients by which to teach them the wondrous Dharma
so that they are all enabled to comprehend the genuine truths.
They may use words of remote lands’ spells to teach the four truths,
may skillfully use esoteric language to teach the four truths,
may use direct human language to teach the four truths,
or may use the esoteric languages of the devas to teach the four truths.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
345
They may analyze words of texts to teach the four truths,
decisively determine principles to teach the four truths,
skillfully refute others’ claims to teach the four truths,
or may use ideas outsiders cannot shake to teach the four truths.
They may use speech of eight kinds of beings228 to teach the four truths
may use all sorts of languages to teach the four truths,
or may adapt to the sounds of whatever language beings understand
to teach the four truths for them, thereby enabling their liberation.
All dharmas of all buddhas
are all proclaimed in these ways, none of them not exhaustively.
Their sphere of language comprehension is inconceivable.
This is what exemplifies the power of the Dharma-teaching samādhi.
There is a supreme samādhi known as “happiness,”
able to everywhere rescue and liberate the many types of beings,
in which one emanates a great and inconceivable radiance
that enables all those seeing it take up the training.
The light it emanates is known as “good to behold.”
If any being encounters this light,
he will certainly be enabled to gain benefit, not meeting it in vain.
Due to this, he will succeed in perfecting unexcelled wisdom.
That light shows the buddhas,
shows the Dharma, shows the Sangha, shows the right path,
and also shows the stupas and images of the buddhas.
It is for this reason that this light is produced.
It also emanates a light known as “dazzling illumination”
that even outshines all the light of the devas.
Of all the kinds of obscuring darkness, none are not dispelled by it
as its shining everywhere produces abundant benefit for beings.
This light awakens all beings
and causes them to raise up offerings of lamplight to the buddhas.
Then, because they make offerings of lamps to the buddhas,
they succeed in becoming unexcelled lamps for the world.
From lighting all kinds of oil lamps and ghee lamps,
from lighting all kinds of bright torches, and also from giving
many kinds of scents, wondrous herbs, and fine bejeweled candles—
It is due to offering these to buddhas that one acquires this light.
It also emanates a light known as “salvation.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and cause them to make the great universal vow
to liberate all the many kinds of beings from the ocean of desires.

346

The Flower Adornment Sutra
If one is able to make the great universal vow
to liberate all the many sorts of beings from the ocean of desires,
then one becomes able to cross beyond the four floods229
and show beings the way to the sorrowless city of liberation.
It is due to building bridges, ferries, and rafts
in all places where roads encounter great rivers
and due to criticizing conditioned existence while praising quiescence
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “extinguishing craving.”
This light is able to awaken all beings,
and cause them to abandon the five types of desires
and exclusively reflect upon the sublime Dharma flavor of liberation.
If one is able to abandon the five types of desires
and exclusively reflect upon the sublime Dharma flavor of liberation,
then one is able to use the rain of the Buddha’s elixir of immortality
to everywhere extinguish the cravings of those in the world.
It is due to kindly making gifts of ponds, wells, and flowing springs,
being exclusively devoted to seeking the path to unexcelled bodhi,
criticizing the five desires, and praising the dhyāna absorptions
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “joyous delight.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and cause them to feel fond admiration for the bodhi of the Buddha
and resolve to realize the path not reliant on a teacher.230
It is by making images of the greatly compassionate Tathāgata,
adorned with the many marks and sitting on a lotus throne,
and by forever praising the Most Supreme One’s meritorious qualities
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “fond delight.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and cause their minds to delight in the buddhas
and also delight in the Dharma and delight in the Sangha.
If one’s mind forever delights in the buddhas
and also delights in the Dharma and delights in the Sangha,
then, in the midst of the Tathāgata’s assembled congregation,
one becomes able to realize the unexcelled deep dharmas patience.
It is due to awakening countless beings, everywhere
inspiring mindfulness of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha jewels, and
showing others how to make the resolve and do meritorious practices
that one is therefore able to produce this light.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
347
It also emanates a light known as “accumulation of merit.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and cause them to practice all kinds of measureless giving,
whereupon, because of this aspiration, they seek the unexcelled path.
It is due to arranging great assemblies dedicated to limitless giving
in which all who come seeking help are completely satisfied
and not allowed to feel as if they have a shortage of anything
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “complete in wisdom.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and enable them, in but one dharma in a single mind-moment,
to entirely understand all the countless gateways to the Dharma.
It is due to distinguishing aspects of Dharma for beings
and then using the definitive genuine meaning
to skillfully teach the meaning of the Dharma without omission
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “lamp of wisdom.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and enable them to realize the empty and quiescent nature of beings
and realize that all dharmas are devoid of any inherent existence.
It is by expounding on dharmas as empty, free of any agent of actions,
like a conjuration, like a mirage, like the moon reflected in the water,
and so forth, up to their being like images in a dream
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “sovereign mastery of Dharma.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and enable them to acquire dhāraṇīs of inexhaustible capacity
by which they are able to retain all of the Buddha’s dharmas.
It is due to respectful offerings to those who uphold the Dharma,
due to providing for, serving, and protecting worthies and āryas,
and due to giving all kinds of Dharma to beings
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “able to relinquish.”
This light awakens miserly beings
and enables them to realize wealth and jewels are all impermanent
and to always delight in kindly giving with an unattached mind.
It is by being able to subdue miserly thoughts that are hard to subdue,
by understanding wealth is like a dream and like floating clouds,
and by growth in the pure mind inclined to kindly giving
that one is therefore able to produce this light.

348

The Flower Adornment Sutra
It also emanates a light known as “dispelling heat.”
This light is able to awaken those who break the prohibitions
and enable them all to accept and uphold the pure precepts
and then resolve to realize the path not reliant on a teacher.
It is by exhorting and leading beings to accept and uphold precepts
and purely practice the ten courses of good karmic action
while also enabling them to resolve to progress toward bodhi
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “adornment with patience.”
This light awakens those inclined toward hatred
and enables them to rid themselves of hatred, abandon arrogance,
and always delight in the dharmas of patience and gentleness.
When one is confronted with beings’ intolerable violence and evil,
for the sake of bodhi, one prevents one’s mind from moving at all
and one always wishes to praise the meritorious qualities of patience.
It is because of this that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “courageous.”
This light awakens the indolent
and enables them to be forever tireless
in reverently making offerings to the Three Jewels.
If one is forever tireless
in reverently making offerings to the Three Jewels,
then one is able to step beyond the spheres of the four māras
and swiftly realize the Buddha’s unexcelled bodhi.
It is by urging and teaching beings to be goaded by vigor,
by being forever diligent in making offerings to the Three Jewels,
and by devotion to protecting the Dharma when it is about to end
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “quiescence.”
This light is able to awaken those with chaotic minds
and enable them to abandon greed, hatred, and stupidity
and maintain unwavering minds that then attain right concentration.
It is due to giving up all bad spiritual guides,
meaningless conversations, and defiled actions
while also praising dhyāna absorption and dwelling in an araṇya231
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “wisdom adornment.”
This light awakens those who are deluded and confused
and causes them to realize the truths, understand conditioned arising,
and develop penetrating wisdom in all their faculties.232

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
349
If one is able to realize the truths, understand conditioned arising,
and develop penetrating wisdom in all one’s faculties,
then one acquires the dharma of the solar lamp samādhi,
wisdom light, and success in attaining the fruit of buddhahood.
It is due to being able to sacrifice the throne, wealth, and one’s life
in seeking right Dharma, doing so for the sake of bodhi, and then,
having learned it, being diligently devoted to teaching it for the many
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “wisdom of the buddha.”
This light awakens all sentient beings
and enables them to see countlessly and boundlessly many buddhas,
each of whom sits atop a jeweled lotus flower.
It is due to praising the Buddha’s awesome virtue and liberations,
proclaiming Buddha’s measureless sovereign masteries,
and revealing the Buddha’s powers and spiritual superknowledges
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “fearless.”
When this light’s illumination falls on those who are frightened,
even the means of poisonous injury possessed by non-humans
are all caused to be swiftly and completely eliminated.
It is due to being able to bestow fearlessness on beings,
due to urging those inflicting torment and injury to cease doing so,
and due to rescuing those in dangerous straits, orphans, and the poor
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “peaceful security.”
This light is able to illuminate those who are sick,
enable them to become free of all suffering and pain,
and enable them all to gain the bliss of right concentration’s samādhi.
It is by giving fine medicines to rescue beings from the many illnesses,
using wondrous jewels to prolong life, giving perfumed body salves,
ghee, milk, and honey, and by satisfying needs for drink and food
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “seeing the Buddha.”
This light awakens those on the verge of death
and enables them to see whichever tathāgata they bear in mind
and succeed in being reborn in his pure land when their lives end.
It is due to urging mindfulness of the buddha on those about to die,
while showing the Bhagavat’s image, enabling its respectful viewing,
thus engendering deep longing in them toward the Buddha
that one is therefore able to produce this light.

350

The Flower Adornment Sutra
It also emanates a light known as “delight in Dharma.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and enable them to always feel delight in right Dharma,
listen to its teaching, expound on it for others, and transcribe it.
It is due to being able to expound Dharma in the Dharma ending age,
due to enabling the minds of those seeking the Dharma to be satisfied,
and due to delighting in diligently cultivating the Dharma
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “sublime sound.”
This light awakens bodhisattvas
and it is able to cause all sounds within the three realms
to be heard as the voice of the Tathāgata.
It is due to using a grand voice to praise the Buddha
and due to providing all kinds of music from chimes and bells
to cause sounds of the Buddha to be heard throughout the world
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “giver of the elixir of immortality.”
This light awakens all beings
and enables them to relinquish all neglectful conduct
and completely cultivate every kind of meritorious quality.
It is by warning that conditioned dharmas are not peaceful and secure
and are pervasively beset by measureless suffering and anguish
while forever delighting in praising the bliss of quiescence
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “most excellent.”
This light awakens all the multitudes
and enables them to everywhere hear from the buddhas
the supreme dharmas of moral virtue, concentration, and wisdom.
It is due to always delighting in praising the supreme precepts,
supreme samādhi, and especially supreme wisdom of all buddhas,
doing so for the sake of the quest to gain the unexcelled path,
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “jewel adornment.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and enable them to acquire an inexhaustible treasury of jewels
with which to make offerings to the tathāgatas.
It is due to using all kinds of supremely marvelous jewels
to offer up as gifts to the Buddha and the Buddha’s stupas
while also practicing kindly giving to the poor and destitute
that one is therefore able to produce this light.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
351
It also emanates a light known as “fragrant adornment.”
This light is able to awaken all beings
and enable those smelling it to be pleased, satisfied in mind,
and definitely bound to develop a buddha’s meritorious qualities.
It is by sprinkling the earth with fine perfumes of humans and devas
as an offering to all the supreme lords
and also by making stupas and buddha images
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “various adornments”
that contains countless jewel banners, pennants, canopies,
burning incenses, scattering flowers, and many types of playing music
that all fill every place within and beyond the city walls.
It is by having formerly used sounds of sublime singing and dancing
and many sorts of scents, fine flowers, banners, canopies, and such,
as well as all sorts of adornments, all as offerings to the Buddha,
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “majestic purity”
that causes the ground to become as flat as one’s palm.
It is due to having adorned buddha stupas and their surroundings
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “great cloud”
that is able to produce fragrant clouds raining perfumed waters.
It is due to having sprinkled the grounds of stupas and courtyards
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “adornments”
that enables the naked to obtain fine clothes.
It is due to having given marvelous physical adornments
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “supreme flavors”
that is able to cause the hungry to obtain fine food.
It is due to having given all kinds of exquisitely fine cuisine
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “great wealth”
that enables the poor and destitute to obtain jewel treasuries.
It is due to having given endless gifts to the Three Jewels
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified vision”
that is able to cause the blind to see the many forms.
It is due to having given lamps to buddhas or buddhas’ stupas
that one is therefore able to produce this light.

352

The Flower Adornment Sutra
It also emanates a light known as “purified hearing”
that is able to cause all who are deaf to hear well.
It is due to providing drum music for buddhas or buddhas’ stupas
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified sense of smell”
that enables one to smell scents one has never smelled before.
It is due to having given incense to buddhas or buddhas’ stupas
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified tongue”
by which one is able to use a beautiful voice in praising the Buddha.
It is due to forever banishing coarse, foul, and unwholesome speech
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified body”
that enables those of defective faculties to have them fully restored.
It is due to revering buddhas or buddhas’ stupas with one’s body
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified mind”
that enables those who lost their minds to gain right mindfulness.
It is due to developing sovereign mastery in cultivating all samādhis
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified forms”
that enables one to see an inconceivable number of buddhas’ forms.
It is due to having used many marvelous forms to adorn stupas
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified sounds”
that enables one to realize the nature of sound is originally quiescent.
It is due to contemplating sound’s origination as like echoes in a valley
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified fragrances”
that causes all rank filth to attain a purified fragrance.
It is due to using fragrant water in washing stupas and bodhi trees
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified tastes”
that is able to remove all toxins from whatever one tastes.
It is due to constant offerings to the Buddha, Sangha, and parents
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified tangibles”
that is able to cause all unpleasant tangibles to become soft
so that, when spears, spikes, swords, and lances rain from the sky,
it causes them all to be transformed into marvelous floral chaplets.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
353
It is because, in the past, in greeting and escorting tathāgatas,
one sprinkled fragrant water, scattered flowers, and spread out robes
on the roads to enable them to step there
that one is therefore able to produce this light.
It also emanates a light known as “purified dharmas”
that is able to cause all pores
to expound the inconceivable sublime Dharma233
and cause all beings who hear it to become pleased and awakened.
“Whatever arises from causes and conditions is unproduced,”
“The Dharma body of the buddhas is not a body,”
“The nature of dharmas abides forever, like empty space.”
It is by having taught such ideas that one produces light like this.
Comparable sorts of gateways of light rays such as these
are as limitless in number as the sands of the Ganges.
They all stream forth from the pores of the Great Rishi.
The works that are performed by each one of them are different.
Just as the lights emanated by each single pore
are as incalculable and innumerable as the sands of the Ganges,
so too is this true of all those pores.
This is all due to the samādhi power of the Great Rishi.
The lights encountered accord with original conduct
and correspond to their past lives’ affinities and partners in practice.
For these reasons, the lights now emanated are of these kinds.
This is all due to the Great Rishi’s wisdom and sovereign mastery.
Due to joint cultivation of meritorious karma in the past,
due to feeling fond admiration and being able to rejoice in it,
or, in this same way, due to merely having seen what was done—
They are all able thereby to succeed in seeing these lights.
Where one cultivated many meritorious deeds on one’s own,
made offerings to countless buddhas,
or always sought to acquire the Buddha’s meritorious qualities—
These are the ones whom these lights awaken.
Just as when those who are born blind fail to see the sun,
this is not because there is no sun that rises in the world,
for everyone with eyes is still able to clearly see it,
and each of them pursues their work according to their occupations.
So too it is with the lights emanated by the great eminences.
Those possessed of wisdom are all able to see them,
whereas common men of erroneous faith or inferior understanding
will never be able to witness these lights.

354

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Just as palaces and carriages made of maṇi jewels
adorned with marvelous gems, magical scents, and lustrous finishes
are naturally and abundantly owned by those possessed of merit,
yet are places in which those bereft of merit could not live,
so too it is with the lights emanated by these great eminences.
Those having deep wisdom are all touched by their illumination.
Among foolish common people of wrong faith and inferior insight,
there are none at all who would even be able to see these lights.
Where there are those who, on learning of these different lights,
are able to develop pure and profound resolute faith,
they will forever cut away the entire net of doubts
and swiftly perfect the banner of unexcelled meritorious qualities.
There is a supreme samādhi [known as] “able to manifest”234
[that manifests] retinues and adornments, all of them freely.
It has no peer among any of the congregations of Buddha’s sons
anywhere throughout the lands of the ten directions.
It has a marvelous lotus flower adorned with radiance,
equal in size to a great trichiliocosm
on which his body sits upright, completely filling it.
This is due to the power of this samādhi’s spiritual superknowledges.
There are in addition, in number equal to the atoms in ten kṣetras,
marvelously fine lotus flowers that surround it
on each of which members of the congregation of Buddha’s sons sit,
abiding in the awesome spiritual power of this samādhi.
In previous lives, they perfected good causes and conditions
and completely cultivated a buddha’s meritorious qualities.
Beings such as these surround the bodhisattva,
all united in tirelessly gazing up at him with palms pressed together.
Just as a bright moon shines in the midst of the stars,
so too does the bodhisattva abide within this congregation.
The dharmas practiced by the great eminences are of this sort
when they enter the awesome spiritual power of this samādhi.
Just as they manifest this appearance in one of the directions
as surrounded by a congregation of Buddha’s sons,
so too is this also so in all the other directions as well
as they abide in the awesome spiritual power of this samādhi.
There is a supreme samādhi known as “network of directions.”
The bodhisattva abiding within it teaches on a vast scale,
manifesting his body’s appearance everywhere in all directions,
sometimes as immersed in concentration, or else as having emerged.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
355
Sometimes he enters right concentration in the east
and then emerges from right concentration in the west.
Sometimes he enters right concentration in the west
and then emerges from right concentration in the east.
Sometimes he enters right concentration in the other directions
and then emerges from right concentration in yet other directions.
In this way, he enters and emerges throughout the ten directions.
This is what is known as the bodhisattva’s power of samādhi.
Throughout all the lands of the East,
among all the countless tathāgatas beyond measure,
he appears before them all, everywhere drawing near to them
while still abiding in samādhi, quiescent and unmoving.
And then, throughout all the worlds of the West,
where all buddhas, the tathāgatas, dwell,
he appears in all cases as having emerged from samādhi,
engaged in the vast cultivation of making countless offerings.
Throughout all the lands of the West,
among all the countless tathāgatas beyond measure,
he appears before them all, everywhere drawing near to them
while still abiding in samādhi, quiescent and unmoving.
And then, throughout all the worlds of the East,
where all buddhas, the tathāgatas, dwell,
he appears in all cases as having emerged from samādhi,
engaged in the vast cultivation of making countless offerings.
In this manner, throughout all worlds of the ten directions,
the bodhisattva goes into them all without exception,
sometimes appearing as unmoving, in the quiescence of samādhi, and
sometimes appearing as respectfully making offerings to the buddhas.
He may enter right concentration on the eye faculty,
then emerge from concentration on the form sense object,
revealing the inconceivability of the nature of form
[with an ability] no deva or human could fathom.
He may enter right concentration on the form sense object,
then emerge from concentration on the eye with mind undistracted
and expound on the eye as unproduced, as having no arising,
and as empty by nature, quiescent, and doing nothing.
He may enter right concentration on the ear faculty,
then emerge from concentration on the sense object of sounds
and distinguish the sounds of all speech
[with an ability] no deva or human could fathom.

356

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He may enter right concentration on the sense object of sound,
then emerge from concentration on the ear with mind undistracted
and expound on the ear as unproduced, as having no arising,
and as empty by nature, quiescent, and doing nothing.
He may enter right concentration on the nose faculty,
then emerge from concentration on the sense object of smells
and everywhere acquire all the supremely sublime fragrances
[with an ability] no deva or human could fathom.
He may enter right concentration on the sense object of smells,
then emerge from concentration on the nose with mind undistracted
and expound on the nose as unproduced, as having no arising,
and as empty by nature, quiescent, and doing nothing.
He may enter right concentration on the tongue faculty,
then emerge from concentration on the sense object of tastes
and everywhere acquire all the supreme flavors
[with an ability] no deva or human could fathom.
He may enter right concentration on the sense object of tastes,
then emerge from concentration on the tongue with mind undistracted
and expound on the tongue as unproduced, as having no arising,
and as empty by nature, quiescent, and doing nothing.
He may enter right concentration on the body faculty,
then emerge from concentration on the sense object of tangibles
able to skillfully distinguish all touch
[with an ability] no deva or human could fathom.
He may enter right concentration on the sense object of tangibles,
then emerge from concentration on the body with mind undistracted
and expound on the body as unproduced, as having no arising,
and as empty by nature, quiescent, and doing nothing.
He may enter right concentration on the mind faculty,
then emerge from concentration on the sense object of dharmas,
and distinguish the aspects of all dharmas
[with an ability] no deva or human could fathom.
He may enter right concentration on the sense object of dharmas,
then emerge from concentration on the mind with mind undistracted
and expound on the mind as unproduced, as having no arising,
and as empty by nature, quiescent, and doing nothing.
He may enter right concentration in the body of a chaste youth,
then emerge from concentration in a body in life’s prime.
He may enter right concentration in a body in the prime of life,
then emerge from concentration in a body in old age.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
357
He may enter right concentration in a body in old age,
then emerge from concentration in a good laywoman’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a good laywoman’s body,
then emerge from concentration in a good layman’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a good layman’s body,
then emerge from concentration in a bhikṣuṇī’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a bhikṣuṇī’s body,
then emerge from concentration in a bhikṣu’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a bhikṣu’s body,
emerge from concentration in a body of one in or beyond training,235
may enter right concentration in a body of one in or beyond training,
and then may emerge from concentration in a pratyekabuddha’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a pratyekabuddha’s body,
then emerge from concentration manifesting a tathāgata’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a tathāgata’s body,
then emerge from concentration in the body of a deva.
He may enter right concentration in the body of a deva,
then emerge from concentration in a great dragon’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a great dragon’s body,
then emerge from concentration in a yakṣa’s body.
He may enter right concentration in a yakṣa’s body
then emerge from concentration in a ghost or spirit body.
He may enter right concentration in a ghost or spirit body,
then emerge from concentration in a single pore.
He may enter right concentration in a single pore,
then emerge from concentration in all pores.
He may enter right concentration in all pores,
then emerge from concentration on the tip of a single hair.
He may enter right concentration on the tip of a single hair,
then emerge from concentration in a single atom.
He may enter right concentration in a single atom,
then emerge from concentration in all atoms.
He may enter right concentration in all atoms,
then emerge from concentration on the vajra ground.
He may enter right concentration on the vajra ground,
then emerge from concentration in a maṇi jewel tree.
He may enter right concentration in a maṇi jewel tree,
then emerge from concentration in the Buddha’s light.
He may enter right concentration in the Buddha’s light,
then emerge from concentration on a river or ocean.

358

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He may enter right concentration on a river or ocean,
then emerge from concentration in the fire element.
He may enter right concentration in the fire element,
then emerge from concentration in the wind, with mind undistracted.
He may enter right concentration in the wind element,
then emerge from concentration in the earth element.
He may enter right concentration in the earth element,
then emerge from concentration in a celestial palace.
He may enter right concentration in a celestial palace
then emerge from concentration in space, with his mind undistracted.
This is what is meant by the inconceivable sovereign mastery
of samādhi of those of countless meritorious qualities.
This is such that even all tathāgatas throughout the ten directions
could not finish describing it, even in countless kalpas.
All the tathāgatas join in expounding
on the inconceivable karmic retributions of beings.
Dragons’ transformations, the Buddha’s sovereign powers,
and the bodhisattva’s spiritual powers are also inconceivable.
Even if one wished to use analogies to reveal these matters,
there would finally be no analogy adequate to make the comparison.
Even so, the wise who are possessed of penetrating intelligence
may still understand such meanings by resort to analogies.
The mind of a śrāvaka disciple abiding in the eight liberations
has sovereign mastery in manifesting all the transformations.
He may use a single body to manifest many bodies
and then again may make a single body of many bodies.
He may enter the fire concentration up in the sky,
may stand, sit, or lie down in the sky,
emit water from atop his body and fire from the bottom of his body,
emit fire from atop of his body and water from the bottom of his body.
In this manner, in but a single mind-moment,
he can manifest boundlessly many sovereign powers of various kinds.
If even they who do not possess the great kindness or compassion
and do not seek the path of buddhahood for the sake of beings
are able to manifest these inconceivable phenomena,
how much greater are the sovereign powers of the great benefactors?
They are like the sun and moon roaming through space
whose images are reflected everywhere throughout the ten directions.
In the waters of springs, ponds, reservoirs, marshes, water pots,
or gems, rivers, or oceans—there are none where they do not appear.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
359
The appearances of the bodhisattva’s forms are also just so,
manifesting in inconceivable ways throughout the ten directions
This is due to the dharma of the sovereign powers of this samādhi.
It is only the Tathāgata who is able to realize and fully fathom it.
It is just as a clear lake might reflect the images of a fourfold army
in which each distinct detail appears without being blurred,
including even its many sorts of swords, lances, bows, arrows,
shields, armor, chariots, and carriages, none of but a single type.
They all appear in accordance with the differences in all their features
so that there are none that are not fully displayed on the water,
this even as the water itself remains free of any such discriminations.
So too it is in the case of the bodhisattva’s samādhi.
There is a spirit in the ocean known as Fine Sound
whose voice resonates with all beings in the ocean
and who can completely understand all their languages
and cause them all to be happy.
If even that spirit who still possesses greed, hatred, and delusion
is nonetheless able to well understand the voices of all those beings,
how much less could one with the sovereign powers of dhāraṇīs236
somehow be unable to cause the multitude to be happy?
There is a woman named Eloquence
born because of her parents’ prayers to the devas.
Where there are those who abandon evil and delight in truth,
she is able to endow them with marvelous eloquence.237
If even she who still possesses greed, hatred, and delusion
is still able as a matter of course to bestow eloquence on others,
how much less could a bodhisattva who possesses wisdom
somehow be unable to provide benefit to beings?
Consider for instance a magician versed in the means of conjuration
who is able to manifest countless phenomena of all different sorts
so in but a moment he conjures the passage of days, months, and years
in an abundantly wealthy city of great peace and happiness.
If even that conjurer who still possesses greed, hatred, and delusion
is nonetheless able to please worldlings with magical powers,
how much less could one with dhyāna samādhi’s powers of liberation
be unable to inspire joyous delight in the multitudes?
When the devas engage in battle with the asuras,
those asuras meet defeat and run off in retreat,
whereupon their weaponry, chariots, and brigades
simultaneously disappear where no one can see them.

360

The Flower Adornment Sutra
If even those still possessed of greed, hatred, and delusion
are nonetheless able to create inconceivable transformations,
how much the more so those with spiritual powers and fearlessnesses.
How could they somehow be unable to manifest sovereign powers?
Śakra Devānām Indra has a king of elephants
who knows when the heavenly lord wishes to travel
and then spontaneously forms thirty-three heads,
each and every one of which is equipped with six tusks.
On each of those tusks are seven water ponds
brimming with pure, fragrant, and tranquil waters.
In each of those ponds of pure water,
there are seven marvelous majestically adorned lotus flowers.
On each of those majestically adorned lotus flowers
are seven celestial jade nymphs.
All are skilled in the arts and in playing the many sorts of music
and so it is they engage in pleasures with their lord, Indra.
That elephant sometimes also relinquishes his original form
and then transforms his body to become the same as that of the devas
so that his deportment and actions all become the same as theirs.
He has these transformational powers of spiritual superknowledges.
Although he still has greed, hatred, and delusion,
he is nonetheless able to manifest all kinds of superknowledges.
How much less could one replete in expedients and wisdom
not exercise sovereign powers in the meditative absorptions?
Take for instance an asura who can transform his body
so it can step onto the vajra plane and stand in the middle of the ocean
where the ocean waters at their deepest only reach his midsection
while his head reaches the same height as Mount Sumeru’s summit.
Although he still has greed, hatred, and delusion,
he is able to manifest such great spiritual superknowledges as these.
How much less could a World-Lighting Lamp who subdues the māras
not possess freely-exercised awesome spiritual powers?
When the devas and the asuras battled with each other,
Lord Indra’s spiritual powers were inconceivable.
No matter how large an asura army took the field,
he manifested bodies in equal number to oppose them.
All those asuras then had this thought:
“Now that Śakra Devānām Indra is coming toward me,
he will certainly seize my five kinds of bonds.”238
Due to this, their hordes were all struck with sorrow and despair.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
361
Śakra Devānām Indra then manifested a body with a thousand eyes
holding a vajra and emanating flames, wearing armor,
bearing weapons, and displaying his most awesome severity,
whereupon all the asuras stared at him and then fled in retreat.
Although he only possessed the power of a small amount of merit,
he was still able to decisively vanquish that great opposing army.
How much less could one perfect in meritorious qualities who
rescues and liberates everyone fail to exercise sovereign power?
There is a celestial drum in the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven
that is created by and obtained from the karmic rewards of the devas.
It realizes when the heavenly host is tending toward neglectfulness
and then spontaneously sends forth its voice from space.
It warns: “The five desires are all impermanent,
like a mass of foam bubbles on water, inherently empty and false.”
“All of existence is like a dream, like a mirage,
like floating clouds, and like the moon reflected on the water.”
“Negligence is an adversary that produces suffering and affliction.”
“It is not the elixir of immortality, but rather the path of saṃsāra.”
“If one engages in all kinds of neglectful actions,
one will enter the maw of the great leviathan of mortality.”239
“They are the very origin of all the worlds’ many kinds of sufferings
and what all the āryas have come to abhor.”
“The nature of the five desires is to destroy our meritorious qualities.”
“You should all instead delight in the true Dharma.”
When the devas of the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven hear this voice,
they all come together, ascend into the Hall of Good Dharmas,
whereupon Lord Indra explains the sublime Dharma for them,
enabling them all to accord with quiescence and do away with desire.
That voice has no shape and cannot be seen,
yet it is still able to benefit the multitudes of devas.
How much less could one whose form bodies are manifested at will
somehow fail to rescue and liberate the many kinds of beings?
When the devas and the asuras fought with each other,
the merit of the devas exhibited its extraordinarily supreme power.
The heavenly drum emanated voices informing their congregations:
“You all should not be beset with worries or fears.”
When the devas heard the sound of its proclamation,
they all dispensed with worries and fears and increased in strength.
Just then, the asuras’ minds were struck with quavering and terror
and all the armies they had led forth ran away in retreat.

362

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The wonderful elixir of immortality absorption, like a celestial drum
constantly emanates a quiescent sound that subdues the māras.
With greatly compassionate pity, it strives to rescue everyone
and everywhere causes beings to extinguish their afflictions.
When Śakra Devānām Indra responds to his celestial nymphs
who are ninety-two nayutas in number,
he causes every one of them to think,
“The Heavenly Lord indulges in pleasures only with me.”
As, among the celestial nymphs, he personally responds to them all,
so too is this so in the Hall of Good Dharmas.
In but a single moment, he can manifest spiritual superknowledges,
enabling him to appear before each deva and speak Dharma for him.
Śakra Devānām Indra still has greed, hatred, and delusion,
yet he is able to cause his entire retinue to feel joyous delight.
How much less could those of great expedients and spiritual powers
somehow be unable to cause everyone to feel pleased?
The Paranirmita Vaśavartin king of the sixth desire realm heaven
acquires the powers of sovereign mastery within the desire realm
whereby, through creating a net of karma, afflictions, and sufferings,
he is able to tie up all common people.
He still has greed, hatred, and delusion,
yet he is nonetheless able to acquire sovereign power over beings.
How much less could he who has the ten powers of sovereign mastery
somehow be unable to cause beings to take up his same practices?
The king of the great trichiliocosm’s Great Brahma Heaven,
in which all the Brahma Heaven devas are dwelling,
is able to manifest in front of the seat of each one of them
and freely expound teachings for them with a sublime brahman voice.
If even he who dwells in the world in the path of the Brahma Heavens
still has these wish-fulfilling spiritual powers of dhyāna samādhi,
how much less could one who is unexcelled in transcending the world
fail to possess powers of sovereign mastery in dhyāna and liberations?
When the king of the ocean dragons sends down rain,
the Maheśvara Heaven King, possessed of sovereign wisdom,
is able to differentiate and count those drops,
distinguishing them all in but a single mind-moment.
For one who diligently cultivated across countless koṭīs of kalpas
and then acquired this unexcelled wisdom of bodhi,
how could he not thoroughly know in but a single mind-moment
the thoughts that are present in the minds of all beings?

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
363
The karmic retributions of beings are inconceivable.
They produce the power of the great winds giving rise to the world,
the great oceans, the mountains, the palaces in the heavens,
the radiance of the many jewels, and the myriad kinds of things.
They are also able to spread clouds and send down great rains,
are also able to disperse and do away with all the cloud-filled air,
are also able to ripen all the seeds,
and are also able to bring happiness to the many types of beings.
Such winds are unable to train in the pāramitās
nor do they train in the Buddha’s meritorious qualities,
yet, still they are able to create such inconceivable phenomena.
How much more so is this true of those fully perfected in all the vows?
Even all kinds of different voices of men or women,
all kinds of bird and animal cries, and
the sounds of the great ocean, flowing streams, or quaking thunder
all have the capacity to satisfy and please the minds of beings.
How much the less could one knowing sound’s echo-like nature,
already possessing marvelous unimpeded eloquence,
and everywhere adapting to beings and then teaching them Dharma
somehow be incapable of bringing joy to the world?
The ocean has rare and extraordinary dharmas
by which it is able to equally reflect everything
and everywhere completely embrace and contain all beings,
precious things, and the flow of rivers without rejecting any of them.
One having inexhaustible dhyāna absorptions and liberations
also manifests in this same way such equal reflections
while everywhere tirelessly and insatiably cultivating
merit, wisdom, and the marvelous practices.
When the great ocean’s dragon king roams and sports about,
he is everywhere possessed of sovereign mastery.
He spreads forth clouds that fill the skies of the four continents
in which his clouds possess all kinds of adorning colorations.
In the Paranirmita Vaśavartin’s sixth desire realm heaven,
the clouds are the color of real gold.
In the Nirmāṇarati Heaven, their color is that of red pearls.
In the Tuṣita Heaven, they are the color of frost and snow.
In the Yāma Heaven, they are the color of vaiḍūrya.
In the Trāyastrimṣa Heaven, they are the color of emeralds,
In the Four Heavenly Kings Heaven, they are the color of crystal.
And out on the great ocean, they are the color of vajra.

364

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Among the kiṃnaras, they have the color of marvelous incense.
Where all the dragons dwell, they are the color of lotus flowers.
Where the yakṣas dwell, they are the color of white geese.
Among the asuras, they are the color of mountain stone.
On the continent of Godānīya, they are the color of golden flames.
In Jambudvīpa, they are the color of sapphires.
On the other two continents, they display various adornments
appearing in response to whatever the multitudes prefer.
Again, in the Paranirmita Vaśavartin Heavens,
lightning in the clouds appears like dazzling sunlight.
In the Nirmāṇarati Heaven, it appears like moonlight.
In the Tuṣita Heaven, it appears as the color of jambūnada gold.
In the Yāma Heaven, it appears as snow white.
In the Trāyastrimṣa Heaven, it appears the color of golden flames.
In the Four Heavenly Kings Heaven, it is the color of many jewels.
Out on the great ocean, it is the color of rubies.
In the kiṃnara realm, it is the color of vaiḍūrya.
Where the dragon kings dwell, it is the color of a jewel treasury.
Where the yakṣas dwell, it is the color of crystal.
Among the asuras, it is the color of carnelian.
On the continent of Godānīya, it is the color of fiery pearls.
In Jambudvīpa, it is the color of sapphires.
On the other two continents, it appears as various adornments
in just the same manner for lightning as it does for the clouds.
In the Paranirmita Heaven, thunder sounds like the voice of Brahmā.
In the Nirmāṇarati Heaven, it resembles a big drum’s sounds.
In the Tuṣita Heaven, it resembles the sounds of singing.
In the Yāma Heaven, it is like the voice of celestial nymphs.
In the Trāyastrimṣa Heaven,
it resembles the various sounds made by kiṃnaras.
In the heavens of the Four World-Protecting Kings,
it resembles the sounds made by gandharvas.
Out on the ocean, it sounds like two mountains crashing together.
Among the kiṃnaras, it resembles the sounds of flutes and pipes.
In the city of the dragons, it sounds like the kalaviṅka bird’s call.
In the abodes of the yakṣas, it resembles a dragon maiden’s voice.
Among the asuras, it sounds like heavenly drums.
Among humans, it sounds like the ocean surf.
In the Paranirmita Vaśavartin Heaven, the rain is of marvelous incense
that is adorned with all kinds of different flowers.

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
365
In the Nirmāṇarati Heaven, rain consists of tāla tree blossoms,
mandārava flowers, and rich perfumes.
In the Tuṣita Heaven, the rain consists of maṇi jewels
complete with all kinds of jewel adornments.
The precious jewels in their topknots shine like moonlight
and their supremely marvelous robes are the color of real gold.
In the Yāma Heaven, the rain consists of banners, pennants, canopies,
floral chaplets, rich perfumes, marvelous adornments,
and supremely fine robes the color of red pearls,
and it is attended by all kinds of singing by chorusing nymphs.
In the Trāyastrimṣa Heaven, it rains wish-fulfilling pearls,
agarwood and sandalwood incenses,
and saffron, keśara, tamāla, and other incenses,
in a mixed rain of marvelous flowers and perfumes.
In the cities of the World Guardian Kings, it rains exquisite cuisines
perfect in color and flavor, replete in strength-enhancing powers,
while also raining down an inconceivable variety of exquisite gems.
All of these phenomena are creations of the dragon king.
Additionally, out on those great oceans,
it ceaselessly pours down rain [drops, each] like the axle of a cart240
and also endlessly rains down a great treasury of jewels
as well as all kinds of different adorning gems.
In the kiṃnara realm, it rains down jewel necklaces,
many colors of lotus flowers, robes, and jewels
as well as varṣika and mallikā incenses,
all accompanied by all sorts of different musical sounds.
In the city of the dragons, it rains rubies.
In the city of the yakṣas, it rains down radiant maṇi jewels.
Among the asuras, it rains military weapons
with which to defeat all their adversaries.
On the continent of Godānīya, it rains jewel necklaces
and also rains down countless supremely marvelous flowers.
On the two continents of Pūrva-videha and Apara-Godāniya,
it rains down all kinds of different adornments.
In Jambudvīpa, it rains down pure water
that is fine, pleasing, and seasonal,
that nourishes the many flowers, fruits, and herbs,
and that matures all the sprouts and grains.
All the countless marvelous adornments such as these
and all of these various sorts of clouds, lightning, thunder, and rain

366

The Flower Adornment Sutra
are what the dragon king can create with his sovereign powers
even as his body remains motionless and he is free of discriminations.
If even he who abides out in the midst of the world’s oceans
is still able to manifest such inconceivable powers as these,
how much less could one who enters the Dharma ocean and perfects
the qualities be unable to enact such great spiritual transformations?
Although there are no analogies adequate to illustrate
the gateways of liberation possessed by all those bodhisattvas,
I now nonetheless use these analogies
to briefly explain their powers of sovereign mastery.
Foremost wisdom, vast wisdom,
genuine wisdom, boundless wisdom,
supreme wisdom, and especially supreme wisdom—
Such gateways to Dharma as these have already been set forth.
This Dharma is so rare and so very extraordinary
that, if one who had heard it could recognize and approve of it,
could have faith in it, could accept it, and could praise it,
then being able to act this way would be most especially rare.
For any common worldly person
to believe this Dharma would be extremely rare.
Only one who had diligently cultivated pure merit in the past
could then be able, by the power of past causes, to believe it.
Of all the many types of beings in the world,
there are but few who wish to seek the śrāvaka disciple vehicle.
Those who seek solitary enlightenment are fewer yet.
Those going forth in the Great Vehicle are very rarely met.
But to go forth in the Great Vehicle is still comparatively easy,
for being able to have faith in this Dharma is rarer yet by twice,
even more so if one were to retain it, recite it, teach it to others,
cultivate it in accord with the Dharma, and genuinely understand it.
Even holding a great trichiliocosm atop one’s head
for an entire kalpa without moving one’s body at all
would still not qualify as particularly difficult,
for being able to believe in this Dharma is what is truly difficult.
Even standing in empty space for an entire kalpa,
holding up ten buddha kṣetras with one’s hands
would still not yet qualify as particularly difficult,
for being able to believe in this Dharma is what is truly difficult.
Even the merit gained from making gifts of delightful things
for a kalpa to beings as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras

Chapter 12 — Foremost Worthy
367
would still not qualify as especially supreme,
for the merit of one believing in this Dharma is the most supreme.
If one served as many tathāgatas as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras
and did so for an entire kalpa, [his merit would surely be vast].
[However], if one could recite and retain this chapter,
his merit would be most supreme, surpassing even the merit of that.
At that time, after Foremost Worthy Bodhisattva had finished speak­
ing these verses, the lands of the ten directions shook and moved
in six ways. The light of the māras’ palaces became obscured, the
wretched destinies came to a standstill, and the buddhas of the ten
directions all appeared directly before him, whereupon they each
rubbed the top of his head with his right hand and, in a single voice,
they praised him, saying, “It is good indeed, good indeed that you
so quickly proclaim this Dharma. We all rejoice in accord with this.”
The End of Chapter Twelve

368

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 13
Ascent to the Summit of Mount Sumeru
At that time, due to the awe-inspiring spiritual powers of the
Tathāgata, throughout the ten directions, among all those four-
continent worlds, on the Jambudvīpa continents, everyone saw the
Tathāgata seated beneath the tree. In every instance, there were bod­
hisattvas there who, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, were
expounding on the Dharma. There was no one there not thinking
that he was constantly facing the Buddha.
Then the Bhagavat, even without leaving the bodhi tree, ascended
Mount Sumeru where he headed in the direction of Lord Śakra’s
palace. Lord Śakra, who was just then in front of his Marvelous
Excellence Palace, saw from afar that the Buddha was coming, where­
upon, through the use of his spiritual powers, he decorated his pal­
ace with adornments and placed in it a lion throne made entirely of
wondrous jewels which everywhere emanated a treasury of light. It
was decorated with a myriad levels of the most ultimately fine adorn­
ments, including a myriad gold nets covering it from above, a myr­
iad curtains and a myriad canopies arrayed all around it, a myriad
hanging sashes of elegantly embroidered silks, a myriad interlaced
strands of pearls which completely encircled it, and a myriad kinds of
robes spread out on the throne. It was surrounded by a myriad young
devas and a myriad Brahma Heaven kings, and it was illuminated by
the dazzling radiance of a myriad lights.
Then, after Lord Śakra had prepared this throne for the Tathāgata,
with body bent low and palms pressed together, he respectfully faced
the Buddha and said, “Welcome, O Bhagavat. Welcome, Well Gone
One. Welcome, Tathāgata. We only wish that the Right and Fully
Enlightened One will have pity on us and stay here in this palace.”
The Bhagavat then accepted his invitation and entered that
Marvelous Excellence Palace. This also happened in the same way in
all those other worlds throughout the ten directions.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Lord Śakra
brought all the music in all those palaces to a natural pause and then,
recalling the roots of goodness planted by the buddhas throughout
the past, he spoke these verses:

370

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Kāśyapa Tathāgata embodied the great compassion
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Kanakamuni was one of unimpeded vision
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Krakucchanda was like a mountain of gold
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Viśvabhū Buddha was free of the three kinds of defilement
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Śikhin Tathāgata had abandoned discriminations
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Vipaśyin Buddha was like a full moon
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Puṣya had clearly penetrated the ultimate truth
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Tiṣya Tathāgata possessed unimpeded eloquence
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Padma Buddha possessed stainless purity
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.
Burning Lamp Tathāgata emanated great radiance
and was most unexcelled in all forms of auspiciousness.
That buddha has previously come and entered this palace.
This place therefore is most auspicious.

Chapter 13 — Ascent to the Summit of Mount Sumeru
371
Just as in this world this king of the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven, assisted by
the spiritual power of the Tathāgata, praised the meritorious qualities
of those ten buddhas, so too did all those other Śakras, those heavenly
kings, also utter such praises of the buddhas’ meritorious qualities.
The Bhagavat then entered that Marvelous Excellence Palace and
took his seat in the lotus posture. That palace then suddenly became
just as vast in its capacity as that entire celestial congregation’s abode.
So too did this also occur in this same way in all those other worlds
throughout the ten directions.
The End of Chapter Thirteen

372

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 14
The Praise Verses on the Summit of Mount Sumeru
At that time, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from worlds
beyond lands as numerous as the atoms in a hundred buddha kṣetras,
there came a great bodhisattva from within the worlds in each of the
ten directions. Each of them was attended by bodhisattvas as numer­
ous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, all of whom came and gathered
together there.
Their names were Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva, Comprehensive
Wisdom Bodhisattva, Supreme Wisdom Bodhisattva, Meritorious
Qualities Wisdom Bodhisattva, Vigorous Wisdom Bodhisattva,
Fine Wisdom Bodhisattva, Knowing Wisdom Bodhisattva, Genuine
Wisdom Bodhisattva, Unsurpassable Wisdom Bodhisattva, and Solid
Wisdom Bodhisattva.
The lands from which they came were Indra Flower World,
Padma Flower World, Jeweled Flower World, Utpala Flower World,
Vajra Flower World, Sublime Fragrance Flower World, Mind-Pleasing
Flower World, Aruṇa Flower World, Narādhāra Flower World, and
Empty Space Flower World.
They had all purely cultivated the brahman conduct in the pres­
ence of buddhas. They were Extraordinary Moon Buddha, Endless
Moon Buddha, Unmoving Moon Buddha, Wind Moon Buddha,
Water Moon Buddha, Liberation Moon Buddha, Unsurpassable
Moon Buddha, Constellation Moon Buddha, Pure Moon Buddha, and
Completely Understanding Moon Buddha.
After these bodhisattvas had arrived in the presence of the Buddha,
they bowed down their heads in reverence at the Buddha’s feet and
then each of them transformationally created a Vairocana Treasury
Lion throne off in the direction from which he had come and sat
down on it in the lotus posture. And just as those bodhisattvas came
and gathered on the summit of Mount Sumeru in this world, so too
did they do so in all other worlds as well. All the names of those bod­
hisattvas, the names of their worlds, and the names of their buddhas
were all identical to and no different from [those in this world].
Then, the Bhagavat emanated from the toes of his two feet a hun­
dred thousand koṭīs of marvelously colored light rays which, in all

374

The Flower Adornment Sutra
worlds of the ten directions, everywhere illuminated the summits of
their Mount Sumerus and their buddhas together with the great con­
gregations in the palaces of those Lord Indras, doing so in such a way
that none of them were not completely revealed.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the
Buddha, Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions
and then spoke these verses:
The Buddha has emanated these rays of pure light
by which we everywhere behold the Guides of the World
and the summits of the Sumerus, the kings of mountains,
on which they abide, within the Marvelous Excellence Palaces.
All the Lord Śakras, those heavenly kings,
request the buddhas to enter the palaces,
and then all utter ten exquisite verses
in praise of the tathāgatas.
In all those great assemblies,
all those bodhisattva congregations
have come there from the ten directions
and have conjured thrones on which they peacefully sit.
All the bodhisattvas in those assemblies
in all cases have the same names as ours.
The worlds from which they have come
also all possess identical names.
The bhagavats in their lands of origin
are also all of the same names.
They too have purely cultivated unexcelled practices,
each in the presence of his buddha.
O Sons of the Buddha, you should all contemplate
these sovereign powers of the Tathāgata
by which, in all those Jambudvīpas,
everyone says the Buddha resides there among them.
Just as we now observe the Buddha
dwelling on the summit of Mount Sumeru,
so too is this so throughout all the ten directions,
due to the sovereign powers of the Tathāgata.
In every one of those worlds,
they resolved to seek the path to buddhahood
and, relying on vows such as these,
they cultivated the practices leading to bodhi.
Using all kinds of different bodies, the Buddha
roams everywhere throughout the worlds,

Chapter 14 — The Praise Verses on the Summit of Mount Sumeru
375
utterly unimpeded within the Dharma realm,
in ways no one could possibly fathom.
The light of his wisdom always shines everywhere
and dispels all the darkness in the world.
He is peerless in all that he does.
How then could anyone possibly fathom this?
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha,
Comprehensive Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions
and then spoke these verses:
Suppose that, for a hundred thousand kalpas,
someone constantly gazed at the Tathāgata,
but did not rely on the genuine meaning
in contemplating the Savior of the World.
Such a person, by seizing on appearances,
simply increases his web of delusion
and ties himself up in the prison of saṃsāra where,
blind and in the dark, he does not see the Buddha at all.
Contemplate all dharmas as devoid of any inherent existence,
and, in accordance with their characteristic
of being produced and destroyed,
as mere utterances of artificial designations.
Still, all dharmas are unproduced
and all dharmas are undestroyed.
If one is able to comprehend them in these ways,
then all buddhas will always appear directly before him.
The nature of dharmas is fundamentally empty and quiescent
and devoid of anything one can grasp or anything one can see.
The emptiness of any inherent nature is just the Buddha.
This is something one cannot assess through thought.
If one realizes that all dharmas,
in their essential nature, are just thus,
such a person then will not be caused by the afflictions
to become either defiled or attached.
When the common person sees any dharmas,
he is only turned by their signs.
He does not comprehend that dharmas are signless,
and, because of this, he does not see the Buddha.
The Muni has transcended the three periods of time,
has completely perfected all the characteristic signs,
abides in non-abiding,
is present everywhere, and yet remains unmoving.

376

The Flower Adornment Sutra
As I contemplate all dharmas,
I am able to clearly comprehend them all
so that now, in seeing the Tathāgata,
I am certain and free of all doubts.
Dharma Wisdom previously explained
the true nature of the Tathāgata.
From him I have completely realized
the inconceivability of bodhi.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Supreme
Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke
these verses:
The great wisdom of the Tathāgata
is rare and without peer.
It is such that no one in the entire world
could even approach it merely through reasoning.
Common people erroneously devote their contemplations
to seizing on signs, thus not according with principle.
Being entirely apart from all signs,
the Buddha is not someone they are able to see.
Those who are deluded and ignorant
erroneously seize on the signs of the five aggregates
and fail to fully comprehend their true nature.
Hence these people do not see the Buddha.
Completely understand that all dharmas
are entirely devoid of any inherently existent nature.
If one understands the nature of dharmas in this way,
then he will see Vairocana.
It is because of previous instances of five-aggregate existence
that subsequent aggregates continue to arise.
If one completely knows their nature,
then one sees the inconceivability of the Buddha.
Just as a jewel in the dark
cannot be seen without a lamp,
if there were no one explaining the Dharma of the Buddha,
then, even though they are wise, no one could fully understand it.
And also, just as eyes with cataracts
do not see pure and marvelous forms,
in this same way, a mind that is impure
does not see the Dharma of all buddhas.
Also, just as the bright and clearly shining sun
cannot be seen by anyone who is blind,

Chapter 14 — The Praise Verses on the Summit of Mount Sumeru
377
So too, if one does not possess a wise mind,
then one will never see the buddhas.
If one is able to rid oneself of such cataracts
by entirely relinquishing “forms” and “perceptions,”241
thus not perceiving them in any dharma,
then one will succeed in seeing the Tathāgata.
As for what Comprehensive Wisdom stated earlier
regarding the Dharma of all buddhas’ bodhi,
due to having heard it from him,
I have succeeded in seeing Vairocana.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha,
Meritorious Qualities Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten direc­
tions and then spoke these verses:
Dharmas are all devoid of any reality.
One only erroneously seizes on their signs as real.
Consequently all common people
continue in cyclic existence within the prison of saṃsāra.
Dharmas as spoken of in words and phrases
are erroneously distinguished [as real] by those of but little wisdom.
Therefore they produce obstacles
by which they do not comprehend their own minds.
Being unable to comprehend their own minds,
how then could they know the right path?
Because of intelligence freighted with inverted views,
they proliferate every kind of evil.
Due to not perceiving the emptiness of all dharmas
they constantly undergo the sufferings of saṃsāra.
This is because such people have not yet been able
to possess the purified Dharma eye.
In the past, I endured the many sorts of sufferings
because I failed to see the Buddha.
Therefore one should purify the Dharma eye
and thus observe whatever one should perceive.
If one succeeds in seeing the Buddha,
his mind will have nothing upon which it seizes.
Such a person as this then becomes able to see
dharmas just as they are known by the Buddha.
If one sees the Buddha’s true Dharma,
then one qualifies as one possessed of great wisdom.
A person such as this possesses the purified eye
by which he is able to contemplate the world.

378

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Having nothing that one sees is what constitutes seeing.
Thus one is able to see all dharmas.242
If one has that which he sees in dharmas,
this then is a case of having nothing at all that one sees.
The nature of all dharmas
is neither produced nor destroyed.
How extraordinary! The great Guide
achieved awakening on his own and is able to enlighten others.
As for what Supreme Wisdom stated earlier
regarding the Dharma to which the Tathāgata awakened,
having heard this from him,
we were able to know the true nature of the Buddha.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Vigorous
Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke
these verses:
If one abides in discriminations,
then one damages [the vision of] the purified eye,
delusions and wrong views increase,
and one never sees the buddhas.
If one is able to completely understand even erroneous dharmas,
accord with reality, refrain from adopting inverted views,
and understand that the very origin of what is false is itself true,
then one’s vision of the Buddha will become purified.
If one has that which one sees, then this itself is defilement
and this itself is but a case of not yet seeing.
Leave all views far behind.
In this way, one will then see the Buddha.
The dharmas of the language spoken in the world
are but beings’ erroneous discriminations.
If one realizes everything in the world is unproduced,
only then is this seeing the world.
If, in seeing, one sees the world [as existent],
one’s seeing then has worldly characteristics.
If one sees it as identical to reality and no different,
then this is what qualifies as true seeing.
If one sees it as identical [to reality] and no different,
then, among things, one does not make discriminations.
This way of seeing leaves behind all delusions
and, free of the contaminants, one gains sovereign mastery.
As for all the dharmas which have been distinguished
by the buddhas in revealing their teachings,

Chapter 14 — The Praise Verses on the Summit of Mount Sumeru
379
these are all finally inapprehensible
because their essential nature is pure.
The nature of dharmas is fundamentally pure,
like space itself, signless,
and such that no one could describe it.
Those who are wise contemplate them in this way.
If one leaves all conceptions about dharmas far behind,
if one does not delight in any dharma at all,
and, even in this, has nothing at all that one cultivates,
then one becomes able to see the Great Muni.
As for that which Meritorious Qualities Wisdom has said,
this defines one who sees the Buddha,
one in whom all the practices
have quiescence as their essential nature.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Fine
Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke
these verses:
Those rare and greatly courageous stalwarts,
all of the countless tathāgatas,
having abandoned defilement, achieved liberation of mind.
Having achieved their own liberation, they are able to liberate others.
As I see the Lamp for the World,
it is as one who accords with reality and is free of inverted views,
and as one who has accumulated wisdom
for countless kalpas would be seen.
Of all of the actions in which common people engage,
none of them fail to quickly come to an end.
Yet, because their very nature is like empty space,
one may therefore say they are endless.
What is spoken by the wise is endless,
yet, even in this, nothing at all is spoken.
Yet, because their inherent nature is endless,
they achieve the inconceivable ending.
Within the endlessness of what they speak,
there are no beings at all who can be apprehended.
If one realizes that the nature of beings is just so,
then one sees the One of Great Renown.
Where there is no seeing, one speaks of seeing.
Where there are no beings, one speaks of beings.
Whether it be seeing or whether it be beings,
one should completely realize they have no essential nature.

380

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Whether it be that which is able to see or that which is seen,
one possessed of vision does away with them all.
Where one does not contradict the true Dharma,
this person may completely know the Buddha.
If one completely knows the Buddha
as well as the Dharma spoken by the Buddha,
then he is able to illuminate the world
in the same way as Vairocana Buddha.
The Rightly Enlightened One has well revealed
the pure path of the one Dharma.
Vigorous Wisdom, that great eminence,
has expounded on the countless dharmas.
Whether it be existence or whether it be nonexistence,
those concepts have all been extinguished.
In this way, one becomes able to see the Buddha
and dwell serenely in the apex of reality.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Knowing
Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke
these verses:
Having heard the teaching of the Supreme One,
I then brought forth the light of wisdom
which everywhere illuminates the worlds of the ten directions
in which one everywhere sees all buddhas.
In all of this, not even the smallest thing exists.
There is only the existence of artificial designations.
If one imputes the existence of either self or others,
then this is to enter a hazardous path.
All common people with their grasping and attachments
impute a true existence to the body.
But the Tathāgata is not something that can be grasped,
thus they will finally never succeed in seeing him.
People such as these do not have the wisdom eye.
Thus they are unable to succeed in seeing the Buddha.
Throughout the course of countless kalpas,
they flow on in cyclic existence in the ocean of saṃsāra.
Where there is disputation, that is to speak of saṃsāra.
Where there is no disputation, that is just nirvāṇa.
As for saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
whether as two or together, they cannot be apprehended at all.
If one chases after artificial designations,
seizing on and becoming attached to these two dharmas,

Chapter 14 — The Praise Verses on the Summit of Mount Sumeru
381
such a person fails to accord with reality
and thus does not know the marvelous path of the āryas.
If one conceives such thoughts as:
“This is the Buddha,” or “This is the Most Supreme One,”
these are inverted views not consistent with reality.
Thus one remains unable to see the Rightly Enlightened One.
If one is able to realize that the true essence of these
is the quiescence characteristic of true suchness,
then one sees the Rightly Enlightened Bhagavat
and steps beyond the path of verbal discourse.
If one relies on verbal discourse to describe dharmas,
one remains unable to reveal their true character.
Only if one sees their uniform equality is one then able to perceive it.
As it is with these dharmas, so too it is with the Buddha.
With regard to the past, the present, and the future,
the Rightly Enlightened One has forever cut off all discriminations,
severing them all at their very root.
He is therefore known as the Buddha.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Genuine
Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke
these verses:
One should prefer to endure the sufferings of the hells
if one might thus be able to hear the names of the buddhas
rather than prefer to enjoy measureless bliss
and yet thus be unable to hear the names of the buddhas.
For it is because of not hearing the buddhas’ names at all
throughout the course of the past
that one has endured sufferings for countless kalpas
flowing along in cyclic existence within saṃsāra.
To not hold inverted views with regard to dharmas,
to manifest realizations in accordance with reality,
and to become detached from all signs of compounded phenomena—
this is what constitutes the unsurpassed enlightenment.
The present is not compounded.
So too is this so of both the past and the future.
All such dharmas are signless.
This then is the true essence of buddhahood.
If one is able in this way to contemplate
the extremely profound meaning of all dharmas,
then one perceives the true character
of the Dharma body of all buddhas.

382

The Flower Adornment Sutra
To see what is real as real
and see what is unreal as unreal—
It is due to such an ultimate understanding as this
that he is therefore known as the Buddha.
The dharmas of the Buddha cannot be awakened to.
Completely realizing this is what constitutes awakening to Dharma.
All buddhas cultivate in this manner
[and thus realize that] not a single dharma can be apprehended at all.
One should know that it is because of “one” that there are “many”
and should know that it is because of “many” that there is “one.”
All dharmas have no basis on which they rely,
for they arise solely from a compounded unity.
There is no agent of actions, nor is there anything done.
They are merely a product of karma and concepts.
How can one know that this is so?
It is because, apart from these, nothing at all exists.
No dharmas have any abiding at all.
Their fixed location cannot be apprehended.
All buddhas abide in this
and ultimately do not move at all.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha,
Unsurpassable Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and
then spoke these verses:
The unsurpassed mahāsattva
leaves any conception of “beings” far behind.
It is because there is no one able to surpass him
that he is therefore known as “unsurpassed.”
The station reached by all buddhas
involves no effortful action and no discriminations at all.
They do not retain any of the coarse mental characteristics.243
So too is this true of those that are subtle.244
The sphere of action of all buddhas
has no enumerations within it.
The Rightly Enlightened One has left enumerations far behind.
This is the true Dharma of the Buddha.
The light of the Tathāgata illuminates all places
and extinguishes the many kinds of darkness.
This light does not have anything it illuminates,
and yet it is also not without illumination.
There is no attachment to any dharmas whatsoever,
no bearing them in mind, and no defilement, either.

Chapter 14 — The Praise Verses on the Summit of Mount Sumeru
383
There is no abiding and no abode,
nor does he contradict the nature of dharmas.
There is no duality herein,
nor is there any oneness, either.
One possessed of great wisdom and fine vision
skillfully abides in accordance with principle.
There is no duality in what is nonexistent
and non-duality itself is also nonexistent.
Everything in the three realms is entirely empty.
This is as seen by the buddhas.
Common people have no awakened understanding.
The Buddha enables them to dwell in right Dharma.
Dharmas have no place in which they abide.
If one awakens to this, one sees the nature of one’s own body.
With regard to what is not a body, one nonetheless speaks of a body.
It is non-arising and yet it manifests as arising.
There is neither any body nor is there any seeing.
This is the unexcelled body of the Buddha.
Just so did Genuine Wisdom describe
the nature of all buddhas’ wondrous Dharma.
If there is anyone who hears this Dharma,
he is bound to acquire the purified eye.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Solid
Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke
these verses:
Grand indeed is the great brilliance
of the courageous stalwarts, these unexcelled eminences
who, in order to benefit the many confused beings,
continue to come forth into the world.
With the mind of great compassion,
the Buddha contemplates all beings everywhere,
observing within the three realms of existence
beings in cyclic existence, undergoing the manifold sufferings.
Were it not for the Right and Universally Enlightened One,
the Venerable Guide embodying the qualities,
there would be no one among either devas or humans
who would be able to rescue them.
If the Buddha, the bodhisattvas, and the others
did not come forth into the world,
there would not be even a single being
who would then be able to attain happiness.

384

The Flower Adornment Sutra
It is the Tathāgata, the Rightly Enlightened One,
along with the Sangha consisting of the worthies and the āryas
who, coming forth and appearing in the world,
are able to bestow happiness on beings.
If there are any who see the Tathāgata
for the sake of acquiring the immense wholesome benefit
and who, on hearing the name of the Buddha, then develop faith,
then these will become stupas for those in the world.
We who have seen the Bhagavat
for the sake of acquiring the immense wholesome benefit,
having heard such wondrous Dharma as this,
are all bound to attain buddhahood.
In the past, the bodhisattvas,
due to the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers,
acquired the purified wisdom eye
and completely comprehended the realms of all buddhas.
Now, having seen Vairocana,
they have doubly increased their pure faith.
The wisdom of the Buddha is so boundless
that no attempt to describe it could ever reach its conclusion.
Hence, even if Supreme Wisdom and the other bodhisattvas
including myself, Solid Wisdom,
were to expound on this for countless koṭīs of kalpas,
we still could never finish describing it.
The End of Chapter Fourteen

Chapter 15
The Ten Abodes
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Dharma
Wisdom Bodhisattva entered “the bodhisattva’s countless expedi­
ents samādhi,” whereupon, due to the power of this samādhi, there
came from beyond a number of worlds in each of the ten directions
as numerous as the atoms in a thousand buddha kṣetras, buddhas as
numerous as the atoms in a thousand buddha kṣetras, all identically
named “Dharma Wisdom,” all of whom manifested before him and
said to Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva:
Good indeed, good indeed, O Son of Good Family. Son of Good
Family, that you have been able to enter this “bodhisattva’s count­
less expedients samādhi” is because these buddhas from each of
the ten directions who are as numerous as the atoms in a thousand
buddha kṣetras have all joined in assisting you with their spiritual
powers.
That you have entered this samādhi and are enabled to expound
on the Dharma is also due to the awesome spiritual power arising
from the power of Vairocana Tathāgata’s past vows as well as from
the power of the roots of goodness you yourself have cultivated.
[That this has occurred is]:
To enable an increase in [understanding] the Buddha’s wisdom;
To enable deep entry into the Dharma realm;
To enable a thorough comprehension of the realms of beings;
To enable unimpeded access to whatever one enters;
To enable freedom from obstacles in whatever one practices;
To enable incomparable skillful means;
To enable penetration of the nature of all-knowledge;
To enable awakening to all dharmas;
To enable the knowing of all faculties; and
To enable the ability to retain and expound on all dharmas.
That is to say, this is to bring about the arising of the ten abodes of
all bodhisattvas. Son of Good Family, you should accept the assis­
tance of the buddhas’ awesome spiritual powers and then expound
on these dharmas.
At this time, the buddhas then bestowed on Dharma Wisdom
Bodhisattva:
unimpeded
knowledge;
unattached
knowledge;

386

The Flower Adornment Sutra
uninterrupted knowledge; undeluded knowledge; unvarying knowl­
edge; unfailing knowledge; measureless knowledge; invincible
knowledge; unremitting knowledge, and irreversible knowledge.
Why? The dharmas associated with this samādhi’s power are of this
very sort.
At this time, each of the buddhas extended his right hand and
rubbed the crown of Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva’s head. Dharma
Wisdom Bodhisattva then arose from meditative absorption and told
the bodhisattvas:
Sons of the Buddha, the abodes of the bodhisattvas are so vast that
they equal the Dharma realm and the realm of empty space. Sons
of the Buddha, the bodhisattvas dwell within the family of all bud­
dhas of the three periods of time. I will now describe the bodhisat­
tvas’ abodes.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattvas have ten abodes. All bud­
dhas of the past, the future, and the present have taught them, will
teach them, and now teach them. What are those ten? They are:
The abode of initial generation of the resolve;
The abode of preparation of the ground;
The abode of cultivation of the practices;
The abode of acquiring noble birth;
The abode of complete fulfillment of skillful means;
The abode of right mindedness;
The abode of irreversibility;
The abode of the pure youth;
The abode of the prince; and
The abode of the crown-anointing consecration.
These are what constitute the ten abodes of the bodhisattvas as
taught by all buddhas of the past, the future, and the present.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of gener­
ation of the resolve? This bodhisattva may see the Buddha’s, the
Bhagavat’s, majestic form and appearance that is perfectly full in
the form body’s signs, that people delight in seeing, that is rarely
ever encountered, and that is possessed of the great awesome pow­
ers. Or perhaps he witnesses the Buddha’s power of unimpeded
physical travel, or hears his utterance of a prediction, or hears him
teaching and remonstrating, or witnesses beings undergoing all
kinds of intense sufferings, or hears the vast dharmas of the bud­
dhas as taught by the Tathāgata, and then resolves to attain bodhi
and seek all-knowledge.

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
387
This bodhisattva may rely on ten rarely acquired dharmas as the
bases for arousing his resolve. What are these ten? They are:
The knowledge that knows what can and cannot be;
The knowledge that knows the karmic retributions ensuing from
good and bad actions;
The knowledge that knows the supremacy and inferiority of all
faculties;
The knowledge that knows the differences in beings’ understand­
ing;
The knowledge that knows the differences in all beings’ realms
of existence;
The knowledge that knows where all paths lead;
The knowledge that knows all dhyāna absorptions, liberations,
and samādhis;
The knowledge that is unimpeded in knowing beings’ previous
lives;
The knowledge that is unimpeded in what is known by the heav­
enly eye; and
The knowledge of the complete cessation of all contaminants
throughout all three periods of time.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
Diligently making offerings to the Buddha;
Happily dwelling in saṃsāra;
Guiding those in the world to enable them to do away with evil
karma;
Always using supreme and sublime dharmas in instructing oth­
ers;
Praising the unsurpassable Dharma;
Training in the Buddha’s meritorious qualities;
Taking rebirth in the presence of the buddhas in order to always
be drawn forth into their company;
Using skillful means in expounding the cultivation of quiescent
samādhis;
Praising the renunciation of cyclic existence in saṃsāra; and
Serving as a place of refuge for suffering beings.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable bodhisat­
tvas to broaden their resolve to attain the dharmas of buddhahood
while also enabling them to spontaneously understand whatever
Dharma they hear without relying on instruction from others.

388

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of prepara­
tion of the ground? This bodhisattva brings forth ten types of inten­
tions toward beings. What are these ten? They are:
The intention to bestow benefit;
The intention to act with great compassion;
The intention to bestow happiness;
The intention to facilitate their establishment;245
The intention to [treat them with] kindly sympathy;
The intention to attract and sustain them;
The intention to protect them;
The intention to see them as the same as oneself;
The intention to serve them as a teacher; and
The intention to serve them as a guide.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
Recitation and extensive learning [of Dharma];
[Cultivation of] quiescence in an unoccupied and quiet location;
Drawing close to a good spiritual guide;
Harmonious and pleasing discourse;
The necessity of speaking at the right time;
Having a mind free of timidity or fearfulness;
Complete comprehension of meanings;
Cultivation in accordance with the Dharma;
Abandonment of delusion and confusion; and
Establishment in an unmoving state.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable bodhisat­
tvas to increase their great compassion toward beings and immedi­
ately understand by themselves whatever Dharma they hear with­
out relying on instruction from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of cultiva­
tion of the practices? This bodhisattva uses ten types of practices in
contemplating all dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
Contemplation of all dharmas as impermanent;
Contemplation of all dharmas as suffering;
Contemplation of all dharmas as empty;
Contemplation of all dharmas as non-self;
Contemplation of all dharmas as devoid of any functioning;246
Contemplation of all dharmas as flavorless;
Contemplation of all dharmas as unlike their names;
Contemplation of all dharmas as devoid of any dwelling place;

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
389
Contemplation of all dharmas as beyond discriminations; and
Contemplation of all dharmas as devoid of substantial reality.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
Contemplation of the realms of beings, the Dharma realm, and the
world’s realms;
Contemplation of the realm of the earth element, the realm of the
water element, the realm of the fire element, and the realm of
the wind element; and
Contemplation of the desire realm, the form realm, and the form­
less realm.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable bodhisat­
tvas’ wisdom to be completely clear while also enabling them to
immediately understand by themselves whatever Dharma they
hear without relying on instruction from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of acquiring
noble birth? This bodhisattva who is born from the teachings of the
āryas perfects ten dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
Perpetual irreversibility from abiding in the buddhas’ presence;
Deeply developed pure faith;
Skillful contemplation of dharmas; and
Complete knowing of beings, lands, worlds, karmic actions, kar­
mic retributions, saṃsāra, and nirvāṇa.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
Complete knowing of all dharmas of all buddhas of the past, the
future, and the present;
Cultivation and accumulation of all dharmas of all buddhas of the
past, the future, and the present;
Perfect fulfillment of all dharmas of all buddhas of the past, the
future, and the present; and
Complete knowledge of the equality of all buddhas.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable others to
progress in their development of equanimity of mind with respect
to the three periods of time while also enabling them to spontane­
ously understand whatever Dharma they hear without relying on
instruction from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of complete
fulfillment of skillful means? The roots of goodness cultivated by
this bodhisattva are all established:

390

The Flower Adornment Sutra
To rescue and protect all beings;
To benefit all beings;
To enable all beings to be happy;
To have deep sympathy for all beings;
To liberate all beings;
To enable all beings to leave behind all conditions of disaster and
adversity;
To enable all beings to escape from the sufferings of saṃsāra;
To enable all beings to develop pure faith;
To enable all beings to acquire the training; and
To enable all beings to attain the realization of nirvāṇa.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
The realization that beings are boundless;
The realization that beings are measureless;
The realization that beings are innumerable;
The realization that beings are inconceivable;
The realization that beings exist in incalculably many forms;
The realization that beings are incalculable;247
The realization that beings are empty;
The realization that beings are devoid of any functioning;
The realization that beings are nonexistent; and
The realization that beings have no inherently existent nature.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable others’
minds to become ever more superior and free of any defiling attach­
ment while also enabling them to immediately understand by
themselves whatever Dharma they hear without relying on instruc­
tion from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of right
mindedness? Even when this bodhisattva hears ten kinds of dhar­
mas, his mind remains concentrated and unmoving. What are these
ten? They are:
Whether he hears praise of the Buddha or slander of the Buddha,
his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains con­
centrated and unmoving;
Whether he hears praise of the Dharma or slander of the Dharma,
his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains con­
centrated and unmoving;
Whether he hears praise of the bodhisattvas or slander of the
bodhisattvas, his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma
remains concentrated and unmoving;

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
391
Whether he hears praise of the Dharma practiced by the bodhisat­
tvas or slander of the Dharma practiced by the bodhisattvas,
his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains con­
centrated and unmoving;
Whether he hears beings are measurably many or measurelessly
many, his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains
concentrated and unmoving;
Whether he hears beings are defiled or undefiled, his mind’s
alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains concentrated
and unmoving;
Whether he hears beings are easy to liberate or difficult to liber­
ate, his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains
concentrated and unmoving;
Whether he hears the Dharma realm is measurable or measure­
less, his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains
concentrated and unmoving;
Whether he hears the Dharma realm has a creation or has a
destruction, his mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma
remains concentrated and unmoving; and
Whether he hears the Dharma realm exists or does not exist, his
mind’s alignment with the Buddha’s Dharma remains concen­
trated and unmoving.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
The realization that all dharmas are signless;
The realization that all dharmas have no substance;
The realization that all dharmas cannot be cultivated;
The realization that all dharmas are nonexistent;
The realization that all dharmas have no genuine reality;
The realization that all dharmas are empty;
The realization that all dharmas have no inherent nature;
The realization that all dharmas are like a mere conjuration;
The realization that all dharmas are like a mere dream; and
The realization that all dharmas are beyond all discriminations.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable others’
minds to progress ever more and achieve irreversibility with respect
to realizing the unproduced-dharmas patience while also enabling
them to immediately understand by themselves whatever Dharma
they hear without relying on instruction from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of irrevers­
ibility? Even when this bodhisattva hears ten kinds of dharmas, he
remains solidly irreversible. What are these ten? They are:

392

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Whether he hears that the Buddha exists or that the Buddha does
not exist, his resolve within the Buddha’s Dharma remains irre­
versible;
Whether he hears that the Dharma exists or that the Dharma does
not exist, his resolve within the Buddha’s Dharma remains irre­
versible;
Whether he hears that bodhisattvas exist or that bodhisattvas do
not exist, his resolve within the Buddha’s Dharma remains irre­
versible;
Whether he hears that the bodhisattva practices exist or that
the bodhisattva practices do not exist, his resolve within the
Buddha’s Dharma remains irreversible;
Whether he hears that there are bodhisattvas who cultivate and
gain emancipation or hears that cultivation does not lead to
emancipation, his resolve within the Buddha’s Dharma remains
irreversible;
Whether he hears that buddhas did exist in the past or that no
buddhas existed in the past, his resolve within the Buddha’s
Dharma remains irreversible;
Whether he hears that buddhas will exist in the future or that no
buddhas will exist in the future, his resolve within the Buddha’s
Dharma remains irreversible;
Whether he hears that buddhas exist in the present era or hears
that no buddhas exist in the present era, his resolve within the
Buddha’s Dharma remains irreversible;
Whether he hears that the Buddha’s wisdom is exhaustible or that
the Buddha’s wisdom is inexhaustible, his resolve within the
Buddha’s Dharma remains irreversible; and
Whether he hears that the three periods of time are of a single
character or that the three periods of time are not of a single
character, his resolve within the Buddha’s Dharma remains
irreversible.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten types of vast dharmas. What are these
ten? They are:
To speak of one is just to speak of many;
To speak of many is just to speak of one;
Texts follow from meanings;
Meanings follow from texts;
Whatever is nonexistent is itself existent;
Whatever is existent is itself nonexistent;
Whatever has signs is signless;

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
393
Whatever is signless is characterized by signs;
Whatever has no nature is identical with a nature; and
The nature itself has no nature.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable others
to progress and become well able to achieve emancipation with
respect to all dharmas while also enabling them to immediately
understand by themselves whatever Dharma they hear without
relying on instruction from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of the pure
youth? This bodhisattva dwells in ten kinds of karmic actions. What
are these ten? They are:
Physical action free of error;
Verbal action free of error;
Mental action free of error;
Taking rebirth wherever he wishes;
Knowing all the different kinds of desires that beings possess;
Knowing all the different kinds of understandings that beings
possess;
Knowing all the different kinds of realms of beings;
Knowing all the different kinds of karmic actions of beings;
Knowing the creation and destruction of the world; and
Sovereign mastery of the spiritual power of unimpeded physical
action.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten types of dharmas. What are these ten?
They are:
Knowing all buddha kṣetras;
Moving all buddha kṣetras;
Holding all buddha kṣetras;
Contemplating all buddha kṣetras;
Visiting all buddha kṣetras;
Roaming to countless worlds;
Receiving countless dharmas of the Buddha;
Manifesting bodies possessed of sovereign mastery in spiritual
transformations;
Emanating vast and fully pervasive voices; and
Serving and making offerings to countless buddhas in but a sin­
gle kṣaṇa.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable others to
progress in their ability to attain skillfulness in all dharmas while

394

The Flower Adornment Sutra
also enabling them to immediately understand by themselves what­
ever Dharma they hear without relying on instruction from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of the
prince? This bodhisattva has thorough knowledge of ten kinds of
dharmas. What are these ten? They are:
Thorough knowledge of beings’ taking on of rebirths;
Thorough knowledge of the arising of all afflictions;
Thorough knowledge of the continuation of habitual karmic pro­
pensities;
Thorough knowledge of the skillful means that are implemented;
Thorough knowledge of the immeasurable dharmas;
Thorough knowledge of all aspects of the awesome deportment;
Thorough knowledge of the differences in the worlds;
Thorough knowledge of past and future phenomena;
Thorough knowledge of how to expound in accordance with
mundane truth; and
Thorough knowledge of how to expound in accordance with ulti­
mate truth.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should
encourage training in ten types of dharmas. What are these ten?
They are:
Skillfulness in the abode of the Dharma King;
According with the norms in the abode of the Dharma King;
[Appropriate behavior] in the palace of the Dharma King;
Entry into the abode of the Dharma King;
Contemplation of the abode of the Dharma King;
The Dharma King’s crown-anointing consecration;
The Dharma King’s empowerments;
The Dharma King’s fearlessnesses;
The Dharma King’s taking of meals and rest; and
The Dharma King’s praises.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable others
to progress to the attainment of the unimpeded mind while also
enabling them to immediately understand by themselves whatever
Dharma they hear without relying on instruction from others.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva’s abode of the
crown-anointing consecration? This bodhisattva perfects ten kinds
of knowledge. What are these ten? They are:
How to cause the shaking of innumerable worlds;
How to illuminate innumerable worlds with dazzling radiance;

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
395
How to sustain innumerable worlds;
How to go forth to visit innumerable worlds;
How to purify innumerable worlds;
How to provide instruction to innumerable beings;
How to contemplate innumerable beings;
How to know the faculties of innumerable beings;
How to enable innumerable beings to achieve entry; 248 and
How to enable innumerable beings to undergo the training.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva’s bodies,
physical deeds, spiritual superknowledges, spiritual transforma­
tions, knowledge of the past, knowledge of the future, knowledge
of the present, establishment of buddha lands, spheres of mind,
and spheres of knowledge are all unknowable. Not even a dharma
prince bodhisattva is able to fathom them.
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva should encourage training
in ten types of knowledge possessed by all buddhas. What are these
ten? They are:
The knowledge of the three periods of time;
The knowledge of the Buddha’s Dharma;
The knowledge of the unimpeded nature of the Dharma realm;
The knowledge of the boundlessness of the Dharma realm;
The knowledge that fills all worlds;
The knowledge that everywhere illuminates all worlds;
The knowledge that sustains all worlds;
The knowledge that knows all beings;
The knowledge that knows all dharmas; and
The knowledge that knows all the boundlessly many buddhas.
Why does he do this? This is because he wishes to enable others’
growth in the knowledge of all modes while also enabling them
to immediately understand by themselves whatever Dharma they
hear without relying on instruction from others.
At that time, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, worlds in each
of the ten directions as numerous as the atoms in a myriad buddha
kṣetras all moved and shook in six ways, namely: movement, univer­
sal movement, equal-and-universal movement; rising, universal ris­
ing, equal-and-universal rising; upward thrusting, universal upward
thrusting, equal and universal upward thrusting; shaking, universal
shaking, equal-and-universal shaking; roaring, universal roaring,
equal-and-universal roaring; and striking, universal striking, and
equal-and-universal striking.

396

The Flower Adornment Sutra
It rained down marvelous heavenly flowers, powdered celestial
incenses, heavenly flower chaplets, various celestial perfumes, bejew­
eled celestial robes, clouds of jewels from the heavens, and celestial
adornments, all accompanied by all kinds of celestial music which,
even without the instruments being played, resounded on its own
while emanating great light and ethereal sounds.
Just as this proclaiming of the ten abodes accompanied by the
appearance of spiritual transformations occurred in Indra’s palace
atop Mount Sumeru in this four-continent world, so too did this also
occur in all the worlds throughout the ten directions.
Furthermore, because of the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from
beyond a number of worlds in each of the ten directions as numerous
as the atoms in a myriad buddha kṣetras, bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras all came there and, filling up the
ten directions, spoke these words:
It is good indeed, good indeed, O Son of the Buddha, that you have
so well proclaimed this Dharma. We are all identically named
“Dharma Wisdom” and we all come from countries identically
known as “Dharma Cloud.” The tathāgatas in those lands are all
known as “Sublime Dharma.” These ten abodes were also pro­
claimed in the dwelling places of all of our own buddhas in which
the congregations, retinues, scriptural phrasings, and meanings
were all also just as set forth here, free of any additions or subtrac­
tions.
O Son of the Buddha, it is through having received the assistance
of the Buddha’s spiritual powers that we have come and entered
this assembly to bear witness for you that, just as all of this has
occurred here, so too has this all transpired in the same way in all
worlds throughout the ten directions.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Dharma
Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions of the Dharma
realm and then spoke these verses:
Perhaps249 due to seeing the Supremely Wise One’s marvelous body,
replete with the majestic adornments of all the marks and signs,
seeing such a venerable one as this who is only very rarely met,
bodhisattvas courageously arouse their initial resolve.
Or due to seeing his incomparably great spiritual superknowledges,
due to thoughts on hearing predictions, teachings, or remonstrances,
or due to seeing the measureless suffering of beings in all destinies—
because of these, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
397
Or due to hearing of all the meritorious qualities, all perfected,
of the tathāgatas, those universally supreme venerable ones,
who, like empty space, do not discriminate.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
Cause and effect in the three times constitute “what can be.”
An inherently existent nature of “self” and such are “what cannot be.”
They may wish to fully comprehend the true meaning of such matters.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to completely comprehend all without exception
of the karmic [retributions] ensuing from good and bad actions
of the past, the future, and the present.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to fully know entry, abiding, and emergence
as they relate to the dhyānas, the liberations, and the samādhis
in their countless varieties, whether defiled or pure.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They seek a fully comprehending and distinguishing knowledge
that accords with the relative acuity or dullness of beings’ faculties
and their correspondingly varying powers to bring forth vigor.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
All beings possess varying degrees of understanding
and what their minds prefer is in each case different.
They may wish to fully know all such countless distinctions.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
All realms in which beings exist are each different
and all the worlds they occupy are measurelessly many.
They may wish to fully know the essential nature of them all.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
All the paths that are traveled throughout all of conditioned existence
in every case have those places to which they lead.
They may wish to fully know the essential nature of them all.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
All beings in all worlds, without a moment’s rest,
drift along on the current in accordance with their karmic deeds.
They may wish to acquire the heavenly eye and clearly see all of this.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may seek to completely know all their past existences
and the essential nature and features of circumstances such as these
associated with all that has occurred in their previous lifetimes.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.

398

The Flower Adornment Sutra
They may wish to fully know the ultimate cessation
of the continual arising of all beings’ fetters and delusions
as well as of their habitual karmic propensities.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to fully know in accordance with their mundane truth
all the different paths of discussion and language
as established in accordance with all the different kinds of beings.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
All dharmas transcend description with words.
They are by nature empty, quiescent, and devoid of any functioning.
They seek a clear comprehension of the true meaning of all this.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to shake all the lands of the ten directions
or even overturn all the great oceans
by fully perfecting all buddhas’ great spiritual superknowledges.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to emanate light rays from a single pore
that everywhere illuminate the countless lands of the ten directions
and awaken everyone illuminated by every light ray.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to place all the inconceivably many buddha kṣetras
into one of their palms and yet still remain unmoving
even as they fully realize everything is like a mere conjuration.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to take the beings in countless kṣetras
and place them, without any crowding, on the tip of a single hair,
realizing they are all both devoid of “others” and devoid of “self.”
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may seek to extract the oceans’ water drops with a single hair
and thus cause all the great oceans to dry up completely
even as they can distinguish and know the number of those drops.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to distinguish and know the number of motes
produced by completely grinding to dust all without exception
of the inconceivably great number of all lands.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to know with complete comprehension,
even to their distant borders, the signs of creation and destruction
of all worlds in the countless kalpas of the past, future, and present.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
399
They may wish to completely know without exception all the Dharma
of all tathāgatas, pratyekabuddhas, and śrāvaka disciples
throughout the three periods of time.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish with but a single hair to raise up and assess
all the countless and boundless worlds,
fully knowing them all in accordance with their substance and signs.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to cause all of the measureless and innumerable
rings of mountains250 to completely enter a single pore
and be able to know them all according to their size.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish with but a single serene and sublime voice
to respond to all in the ten directions according to type, expounding
in a way enabling all to gain a pure and complete understanding.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to completely know the inherent nature
of the language dharmas of all beings
and expound them all without exception by using but a single word.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to acquire such a marvelous tongue faculty
that there is no word or sound in the world they cannot make,
thus enabling all to understand and realize quiescence.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to cause all the signs of creation and destruction
in all the worlds of the ten directions to become entirely visible
while also enabling all to realize they are all born of discriminations.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
All worlds throughout the ten directions
are full of countless tathāgatas.
They may wish to completely know the Dharma of all those buddhas.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to attain a complete comprehension
that all the different kinds of transformations and countless bodies
as numerous as the atoms in all worlds arise entirely from the mind.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish to completely know in but a single mind-moment
all the incalculably and innumerably many tathāgatas
of the past, the future, and the present.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.

400

The Flower Adornment Sutra
They may seek the ability to fully explain a single phrase of Dharma
throughout an endless number of asaṃkhyeya kalpas
and still enable the meanings of that phrase to all be different.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may seek clear comprehension in but a single mind-moment
of the signs of cyclic existence in saṃsāra
of all beings throughout the ten directions.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
They may wish through deeds of body, mouth, and mind
to be unimpeded in paying respects everywhere in the ten directions,
fully realizing the three periods of time are all empty and quiescent.
Because of this, bodhisattvas arouse their initial resolve.
After the bodhisattvas have aroused their resolve in this way,
they should be enabled to go and visit the lands of the ten directions
to respectfully make offerings to all the tathāgatas,
so that, by this they are caused to never turn back.
The bodhisattvas courageously seek the path to buddhahood
and are not wearied by abiding in the midst of saṃsāra.
For others, they praise this, causing them to accord with this practice
so that, in this way they are caused to never turn back.
Throughout the countless kṣetras of the worlds of the ten directions,
they serve as honored lords there within them all
where, for the sake of bodhisattvas, they speak in this way,
so that, by this they are caused to never turn back.
Using the supreme, highest, and foremost
of the extremely profound and sublime pure dharmas,
they encourage bodhisattvas to teach and bestow them on still others,
using teachings such as these to enable them to abandon afflictions.
In all the worlds, they are peerless,
dwelling in stations where they are unshakable and invincible
where, for those bodhisattvas, they always praise
teachings such as these to cause them to attain irreversibility.
The Buddha is the greatly powerful lord of the worlds who,
perfected in all the meritorious qualities,
enables the bodhisattvas to abide in these
and thus, through these teachings, to become supremely great men.
To the abodes of countlessly and boundlessly many buddhas—
They all become able to go there to visit and draw near to them.
They are always drawn forth and sustained by the buddhas.
By teachings such as these, they are enabled to attain irreversibility.

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
401
They freely expound on and proclaim
all the quiescent samādhis without exception.
They speak in this way for the sake of those bodhisattvas
and by this they are enabled to attain irreversibility.
“Demolish the wheel of saṃsāra in all the stations of existence.”
“Turn the wheel of the pure and sublime Dharma.”
“Remain free of all attachments to any of the worlds.”
They speak in this way for the sake of the bodhisattvas.
“All beings fall down into the wretched destinies
and are bound up and driven along by countless severe sufferings.
Become for them their savior, their protector, and their refuge.”
They speak in this way for the sake of the bodhisattvas.
This is the bodhisattva’s abode of generation of the resolve in which
he proceeds directly and resolutely in quest of the unexcelled path.
The teaching dharmas such as I have spoken here
are those that all buddhas also teach in this way.
The bodhisattva in the second abode, preparation of the ground,
should bring forth a resolve such as this:
“I vow to enable all beings throughout the ten directions
to follow the teachings of the Tathāgata.”
Beneficial, greatly compassionate, and happiness-inducing intentions,
securely establishing, kindly sympathetic, and attracting intentions,
intentions to protect beings and see them as the same as oneself, and
intentions to serve them as a teacher, and intentions to act as a guide—
After dwelling in such supreme and sublime intentions as these,
they next enable beings to practice recitation, seek extensive learning,
to always delight in quiescent meditation and right reflection,
to draw close to all good spiritual friends,
to speak in a congenial way, to abandon coarseness and rudeness,
to know the need to observe timeliness in speaking, to be fearless,
to fully comprehend meanings, to cultivate in accord with Dharma,
to abandon delusion and confusion, and to have an unmoving mind.
These are the bodhi practices of those in the initial phase of training.
Those able to practice these practices are true sons of the Buddha.
As I now explain what they should practice,
such sons of the Buddha as these should be diligent in their training.
The third is the bodhisattva’s abode of cultivation of the practices.
One should rely on the Buddha’s teaching in diligent contemplation
of all dharmas as impermanent, suffering, and empty,
as devoid of self or others, as not moving or functioning,

402

The Flower Adornment Sutra
[contemplating] all dharmas as unenjoyable, as involving
nothing corresponding to their names, as having no place they dwell,
as having nothing to discriminate, and as devoid of reality.
One contemplating them in this way is to be known as a bodhisattva.
Next, one enables others to contemplate the realms of beings
while also encouraging contemplation of the Dharma realm.
So too should one encourage them all to contemplate
all the different worlds without exception.
One also encourages contemplations, all pursued exhaustively,
of all the elemental earth, water, fire, and wind
throughout all worlds and empty space of the ten directions
as well as of the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm.
Contemplate those realms, each of them different,
as well as their essential natures, all to the ultimate degree.
If one acquiring such teachings diligently cultivates their practice,
this one is then worthy to be known as a true son of the Buddha.
At the fourth abode, that of acquiring noble birth, the bodhisattva
is born from the teachings of the āryas.
He completely comprehends all that exists as entirely nonexistent,
and, stepping beyond those dharmas, is born into the Dharma realm.
He has indestructibly solid faith in the Buddha,
his mind is established in contemplating dharmas’ quiescence,
and he completely knows with regard to beings of whatever sort
that their essential nature is false and devoid of reality.
So, too, the world, kṣetras, karmic actions, and retributions,
as well as saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are all just like this.
A son of the Buddha who contemplates dharmas in this way
has been born from the Buddha and is known as the Buddha’s son.
He completely knows, accumulates, and perfectly fulfills
all the dharmas of the Buddha
of the past, the future and present eras.
Cultivating and training thus, he achieves their ultimate realization.
He is able to pursue the contemplation
of all tathāgatas of the three periods of time as all equal,
finding that none of their various differences are apprehensible at all.
One contemplating in this way comprehends all three periods of time.
As for what I have here proclaimed and praised,
these are the meritorious qualities of the fourth abode.
If one is able to diligently cultivate them in accordance with Dharma,
he will swiftly attain the realization of the Buddha’s unexcelled bodhi.

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
403
Following upon this, the fifth category of bodhisattvas are those
described as at the abode of the complete fulfillment of skillful means
who deeply enter into the countless sorts of skillful expedients
and bring forth karmic works born of ultimate meritorious qualities.
The many kinds of merit cultivated by these bodhisattvas
are all produced to rescue and protect the many kinds of beings.
They focus their minds on benefiting them and making them happy
while all along being deeply sympathetic and enabling their liberation.
For the entire world, they do away with the many kinds of adversity,
lead them forth from all existences, and enable their happiness.
They strive to train them all, having none they neglect,
thus enabling all to perfect the qualities and progress toward nirvāṇa.
They realize all beings are boundlessly numerous,
measureless, innumerable, and inconceivably many,
as well as incalculable, and so forth.
They hear and accept such dharmas of the Tathāgata as these.
These true sons of the Buddha at the fifth abode
perfect the skillful means with which they liberate beings.
The greatly wise Bhagavat possessed of all the meritorious qualities
instructs them in dharmas such as these.
At the sixth abode, where right mindedness is perfectly fulfilled,
they become free of delusion about the inherent nature of dharmas,
practice right mindfulness and reflection apart from discriminations,
and become such that they cannot be shaken by any deva or human.
Whether they hear praise or slander of the Buddha, Buddha’s Dharma,
the bodhisattvas, or the practices they engage in,
or hear beings are measurable or measureless,
defiled or undefiled, difficult to liberate or easy to liberate,
or hear the Dharma realm is immense or small, created or destroyed,
existent or nonexistent, their minds nonetheless remain unshaken.
Whether in the past, the future, or now in this present era,
their careful mindfulness and reflection remain constantly resolute.
All dharmas are signless,
devoid of substance, devoid of any inherent nature, empty, unreal,
like a conjuration, like a dream, and beyond discriminations.
They always delight in hearing meanings such as these.
Bodhisattvas at the seventh abode, that of irreversibility,
may hear that the Buddha, the Dharma, or bodhisattva practices
exist, do not exist, lead to emancipation, or don’t lead to emancipation.
Although they hear such statements, they remain irreversible.

404

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Concepts such as that buddhas of the past, future, and present
either do exist or do not exist,
that the Buddha’s wisdom is exhaustible or is inexhaustible,
that the character of the three times is singular or various,
that one is just many or that many are just one,
that texts follow from meanings or that meanings follow from texts—
these ideas are all established on the basis of [rational] progressions
and are such that this irreversible person should explain for others.
The idea that dharmas are possessed of signs, that they are signless,
that dharmas have an inherent nature, or that they have no nature—
These different sorts of distinctions are all based on each other.
After this person has heard this, he grasps the ultimate truth.
At the eighth of the bodhisattva abodes, that of the pure youth,
their physical, verbal, and mental actions are all perfected,
pure in all things, and free of fault. They attain sovereign mastery
in taking on rebirths in accordance with their intentions.
They know the mental dispositions of beings,
know each of their various different kinds of mental understandings
as well as all their other associated dharmas and
the signs of creation and destruction of the ten directions’ worlds.
They attain swiftly invoked marvelous spiritual superknowledges
by which they freely go everywhere at will
to wherever buddhas dwell in order to hear them teach the Dharma
and praise unremitting and tireless cultivation.
They completely know all the buddha lands,
cause quaking in them, hold them, contemplate them,
and, stepping beyond incalculably many buddha lands,
they roam to boundlessly and countlessly many worlds.
They pose questions about dharmas numbering in the asaṃkhyeyas,
have sovereign mastery in all the bodies they wish to take on,
have no type of skill in words and speech they have not perfected,
and they devote themselves to serving countless buddhas.
At the ninth of the bodhisattva abodes, that of the prince,
they are able to see the differences in beings’ taking on of rebirths.
There are no afflictions or habitual propensities they do not recognize
and they thoroughly understand all the skillful means they practice.
All the different dharmas, the distinctions in awesome deportment,
the differences among worlds, the aspects of the past and future,
and how to accord with worldly and ultimate truth—
They thoroughly understand and know them all without exception.

Chapter 15 — The Ten Abodes
405
They are skillfully established in the Dharma kings’ abodes
and they accord with all the protocols of their abodes,
whether they are regarding entry into the Dharma kings’ palaces
or the contemplations to be taken up within them.251
As for all the Dharma kings’ crown-anointing consecration dharmas,
their empowerment with spiritual powers, their fearlessnesses,
their taking of meals and rest, their palace quarters, their praises—
They instruct the Dharma princes in all these matters.
They explain all such matters as these for them, none not completely,
and thus enable their minds to become free of attachments.
Upon fully knowing these matters and cultivating right mindfulness,
all buddhas then manifest directly before them.
At the tenth abode, that of the crown-anointing consecration,
the true Buddha’s sons fulfill the supreme and foremost Dharma
and are able to cause quaking and pervasive radiant illumination
in countless worlds throughout the ten directions.
They sustain and visit them all without exception,
completely purifying and adorning them all.
They provide instruction to innumerable beings
and are able to contemplate them and know their faculties completely.
Those they resolve to train are also limitless.
They are all enabled to progress toward the great bodhi.
They contemplate the entire Dharma realm
and go forth to visit all the lands in the ten directions.
Their bodies therein, the deeds done by those bodies,
their spiritual powers, and their transformations are all unfathomable.
Their knowing of the three times, buddha lands, and spheres of mind
are such that not even a Dharma prince could completely know them.
The All-Seeing Ones’ knowledge of the three times,
their utterly complete knowledge of the Dharma of all buddhas,
their unimpeded and boundless knowledge of the Dharma realm,
and their knowledge of the means of filling up all worlds—
Their knowledges of universal illumination and sustenance of worlds,
their knowledges of completely knowing beings and all dharmas,
and their knowledge knowing limitless rightly enlightened ones—
The Tathāgata explains these for them so they are all fully understood.
It is in this way that the bodhisattvas of these ten abodes
are all transformationally born from the Tathāgata’s Dharma.
Whichever meritorious qualities or practices they possess,
they are all such that no deva or human could possibly fathom them.

406

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Those throughout the past, the present, and the future periods of time
who have resolved to seek buddhahood are so boundlessly many
that they would fill up all lands throughout the ten directions.
None of them will not succeed in attaining all-knowledge.
The totality of all lands is boundless.
So too are the worlds, beings, and dharmas.
Delusions, karma, and mental dispositions each differ.
It is because of them that they resolved to attain bodhi.
Their first thoughts of resolve to seek the buddha path are such
that the beings in the world and the adherents of the Two Vehicles
could never fathom even that. How much the less could they fathom
all of the rest of their meritorious qualities and practices?
If one were able to use a single hair to lift up
all the worlds throughout the ten directions,
that is a person capable of understanding the practices
of those Buddha’s sons progressing toward the Tathāgata’s wisdom.
If one were able to empty all the great oceans of the ten directions
by lifting out all their water drops with the tip of a single hair,
that is a person capable of knowing the meritorious practices
cultivated in but a single mind-moment by these sons of the Buddha.
If all worlds were ground to dust motes
and one was able to distinguish and know their number,
then he is a person who could perceive
the path that is practiced by these bodhisattvas.
All buddhas, pratyekabuddhas, and śrāvaka disciples
of the past, future, and present throughout the ten directions
might use all their many different kinds of marvelous eloquence
to explain the initial generation of the bodhi resolve.
Still, since the merit from generating this resolve is so incalculably vast
as to fill up the realms of all beings, even if they jointly described it
with all the multitude’s wisdom, they could never reach the end of it.
How much less [the merit] of all the rest of the wondrous practices?
The End of Chapter Fifteen

Chapter 16
The Brahman Conduct
At that time, Right Mindfulness Devaputra addressed Dharma
Wisdom Bodhisattva, saying, “In all worlds, those in the community
of bodhisattvas, relying on the teachings of the Tathāgata, don the
dyed robe and leave the home life. How are they able to attain purity
in the brahman conduct252 and proceed from the position of a bod­
hisattva to the attainment of the path of unsurpassed bodhi?”
Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva replied:
Son of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva practices
the brahman conduct, he should take ten dharmas as the object
of his attention in meditative contemplation. They are: the body,
physical actions, speech, verbal actions, the mind, mental actions,
the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, and the moral precepts. He
should contemplate them in this way, asking, “Is the body itself the
brahman conduct?” and so forth up to, “Is it the moral precepts that
are the brahman conduct?”
If the body itself were the brahman conduct, one should realize
that the brahman conduct would then be something which is not
good. It would be non-Dharma. It would be turbid. It would be bad-
smelling and repulsive. It would be impure. It would be disgusting.
It would be intractable. It would be defiled. It would be a corpse.
And it would be a mass of worms.253
If physical actions were the brahman conduct, then the brahman
conduct would be walking, standing, sitting, lying down, looking
to the left and right, retracting and extending [of the limbs], looking
down, and looking up.
If speech were the brahman conduct, then the brahman conduct
would be sound, the breath, [the movement of] the chest, tongue,
throat, and lips, exhaling and inhaling, holding and releasing, high
and low pitch, and clarity and roughness [of enunciation].
If verbal actions were the brahman conduct, then the brahman
conduct would be salutations and greetings, abbreviated speech
or extensive speech, metaphorical speech or direct speech, lauda­
tory speech or deprecatory speech, conventionally establishing
speech,254 speech adapted to the mundane, or explanatory speech.

408

The Flower Adornment Sutra
If the mind were the brahman conduct, then the brahman con­
duct would be ideation and mental discursion, would be an instance
of discrimination and all kinds of different discriminations, would
be an instance of recollection and all kinds of different recollec­
tions, would be an instance of reasoning and all kinds of different
reasoning, and would be conjurations and dreams.
If mental actions were the brahman conduct, then the brahman
conduct would be thinking or [the perception of feeling] hot or cold,
hungry or thirsty, miserable or happy, or worried or joyful.
If the Buddha were the brahman conduct, is form the Buddha?
Is feeling the Buddha? Is perception the Buddha? Are karmic for­
mative factors the Buddha? Is consciousness the Buddha? Are the
major marks the Buddha? Are the subsidiary signs the Buddha? Are
the spiritual superknowledges the Buddha? Are his karmic deeds
the Buddha? Or are his karmic rewards the Buddha?
If the Dharma were the brahman conduct, is quiescence the
Dharma? Is nirvāṇa the Dharma? Is non-production the Dharma? Is
non-arising the Dharma? Is ineffability the Dharma? Is being free of
discriminations the Dharma? Is having nothing which is done the
Dharma? Or is not being a composite aggregation the Dharma?255
If the Sangha were the brahman conduct, is one at the stage
preliminary to becoming a stream-winner the Sangha? Is one pos­
sessed of the fruition of a stream-winner the Sangha? Is one at the
stage preliminary to becoming a once-returner the Sangha? Is one
possessed of the fruition of a once-returner the Sangha? Is one at
the stage preliminary to becoming a never-returner the Sangha? Is
one possessed of the fruition of a never-returner the Sangha? Is one
at the stage preliminary to becoming an arhat the Sangha? Is one
possessed of the fruition of the arhat the Sangha? Are those with
the three clarities256 the Sangha? Or are those with the six spiritual
superknowledges257 the Sangha?
If the moral precepts were the brahman conduct, is the ordination
platform the moral precepts? Is the interrogation into one’s purity
the moral precepts? Is the teaching of the awesome deportment the
moral precepts? Is the three-fold statement of the karmadāna the
moral precepts? Is the role of the upādhyāya the moral precepts? Is
the role of the ācārya the moral precepts? Is the tonsure itself the
moral precepts? Is the donning of the kāṣāya robe the moral pre­
cepts? Is the obtaining of sustenance on the alms round the moral
precepts? Or is right livelihood the moral precepts?
Once one has carried out contemplations such as these, one
becomes free of any seizing on the body, becomes free of any

Chapter 16 — The Brahman Conduct
409
attachment to cultivation, becomes free of any abiding in dharmas,
perceives the past as already extinguished, the future as not yet
arrived, and the present as mere empty quiescence, realizes that
there is no agent of karmic actions and no one who undergoes kar­
mic retributions, sees that this period of time does not move at all,
and sees that the other periods of time do not undergo change.258
Which dharma among all of these constitutes the brahman con­
duct? Where does the brahman conduct come from? Who is it that
possesses it? What is its essential substance? Who performs it? Does
it exist or is it nonexistent? Is it form or non-form? Is it feeling or
non-feeling? Is it perception or non-perception? Is it a karmic for­
mative factor or not a karmic formative factor? Is it consciousness
or non-consciousness? One carries on one’s analytic contemplations
in this way:
Because the dharma of the brahman conduct is inapprehensible;
Because the dharmas of the three periods of time are all empty
and quiescent;
Because the mind has nothing to which it attaches;
Because the mind has no obstacles;
Because one’s practice is non-dual;
Because one acquires sovereign mastery of skillful means;
Because one accepts the dharma of signlessness;
Because one contemplates the dharma of signlessness;
Because one realizes the equality of all Buddha dharmas; and
Because one is fulfilling all dharmas of the Buddha.
Factors such as these constitute the bases of the pure brahman con­
duct.
One should also cultivate ten dharmas. What are these ten? They
are:
The knowledge that knows what can and cannot be;
The knowledge that knows karmic retributions as they are related
to past, present, and future;
The knowledge that knows the dhyānas, the liberations, and the
samādhis;
The knowledge that knows the relative supremacy and inferiority
of all faculties;
The knowledge that knows all the different capacities for under­
standing;
The knowledge that knows all the different realms;
The knowledge that knows the end points to which all paths lead;
The knowledge of the unimpeded vision of the heavenly eye;

410

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The knowledge that is unimpeded in knowing previous lifetimes;
and
The knowledge of the complete severance of habitual karmic pro­
pensities.
As one contemplates each of these ten powers of the Tathāgata, one
finds that each of these powers subsumes a countless number of
meanings into all of which one should inquire. Having heard about
them, one should then bring forth the mind of great kindness and
compassion to closely contemplate beings and then never abandon
them. One should reflect on all dharmas incessantly, should engage
in unexcelled karmic deeds but not seek any karmic reward, and
should completely realize that objective spheres are like a conjura­
tion, like a dream, like reflections, like echoes, and also like spiri­
tual transformations.
If bodhisattvas are able to carry on contemplations consistent
with contemplations such as these, they will not develop any dual­
ity-based understandings of any dharma and all dharmas of the
Buddha will soon manifest directly before them, whereupon, when
they make their initial resolve, they will then immediately attain
anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi. They will realize that all dharmas are
identical to the very nature of the mind, they will perfect the wis­
dom body, and their own awakening will not arise in dependence
on others.
The End of Chapter Sixteen

Chapter 17
The Merit of the Initial Resolve
At that time, Śakra Devānām Indra addressed Dharma Wisdom
Bodhisattva, saying, “Son of the Buddha, how much merit is acquired
by the bodhisattva by making his initial resolve to attain bodhi?”
Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva replied:
The meaning of this is extremely profound, difficult to describe,
difficult to know, difficult to distinguish, difficult to believe, diffi­
cult to bring to realization, difficult to carry out, difficult to compre­
hend, difficult to apprehend through reasoning, difficult to assess,
and difficult to penetrate. Although this is so, with the assistance of
the Buddha’s awesome powers, I shall explain this matter for you.
Son of the Buddha, suppose there was someone who made offer­
ings of all kinds of pleasing things to all beings in an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds to the east for an entire kalpa and afterward instructed and
enabled them to purely observe the five moral precepts, whereupon
he did this in the same way in the south, the west, the north, the
four midpoints, the zenith, and the nadir. Son of the Buddha, what
do you think? Would this person’s merit be abundant, or not?
Śakra Devānām Indra replied, “This person’s merit would be such
that only a buddha could know it. As for everyone else, none of them
would be able to measure it.”
Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva said:
Son of the Buddha, if one were to compare this person’s merit to
the merit acquired by the bodhisattva by making his initial resolve,
it would not amount to a hundredth part, would not amount to a
thousandth part, and would not amount to a hundred-thousandth
part. In this same way, it would not be equal to even one part in a
koṭī of parts, one part in a hundred koṭīs of parts, one part in a thou­
sand koṭīs of parts, one part in a hundred thousand koṭīs of parts,
one part in a nayuta of koṭīs of parts, one part in a hundred nayutas
of koṭīs of parts, one part in a thousand nayutas of koṭīs of parts, one
part in a hundred thousand nayutas of koṭīs of parts, one part in
the largest numerable number of parts, one part in a kalā of parts,
one part in the largest calculable number of parts, one part in the
highest number of parts demonstrable by analogy, and it would not
amount to even a single part in an upaniṣad of parts.

412

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Son of the Buddha, for the time being, set aside this analogy.
Suppose instead that there was a person who made offerings of all
kinds of pleasing things to all beings in ten asaṃkhyeyas of worlds
throughout the ten directions, doing so for a hundred kalpas, and
afterward instructed and enabled them to cultivate the ten courses
of good karmic action, after which he made such offerings to them
for a thousand kalpas and then taught them to abide in the four
dhyānas, after which he [made such offerings to them] for a hun­
dred thousand kalpas and then taught them to abide in the four
immeasurable minds, after which he [made such offerings to them]
for a koṭī of kalpas and then taught them to abide in the four form­
less absorptions, after which he [made such offerings to them] for a
hundred koṭīs of kalpas and then taught them to abide in the fruit of
the srota-āpanna, after which he [made such offerings to them] for a
thousand koṭīs of kalpas and then taught them to abide in the fruit
of the sakṛdāgāmin, after which he [made such offerings to them] for
a hundred thousand koṭīs of kalpas and then taught them to abide in
the fruit of the ānāgamin, after which he then [made such offerings to
them] for a nayuta of koṭīs of kalpas and then taught them to abide in
the fruit of arhatship, after which he [made such offerings to them]
for a hundred thousand nayutas of koṭīs of kalpas and then taught
them to abide in the path of a pratyekabuddha. Son of the Buddha,
what do you think? Would that person’s merit be abundant, or not?
Śakra Devānām Indra replied, “Son of the Buddha, this person’s merit
would be such that only a buddha could know it.”
Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva said:
Son of the Buddha, if one were to compare this person’s merit to the
merit acquired by the bodhisattva when he first makes the resolve,
it would not amount to a hundredth part, would not amount to a
thousandth part, would not amount to a hundred-thousandth part,
and so forth on up to its not amounting to even a single part in an
upaniṣad of parts. And why is this so?
Son of the Buddha, when all buddhas first make their resolve,
they do not resolve to attain bodhi solely for the sake of using
all kinds of pleasing things to make offerings to all beings in ten
asaṃkhyeyas of worlds throughout the ten directions for a hundred
kalpas, and so forth on up to doing so for a hundred thousand nayu­
tas of koṭīs of kalpas.
Nor do they resolve to attain bodhi solely for the sake of teaching
and enabling just such a particular number of beings to cultivate
the five precepts or the ten courses of good karmic action, or for

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
413
the sake of teaching them to abide in the four dhyānas, in the four
immeasurable minds, or in the four formless absorptions, or for the
sake of teaching them to gain the fruit of the srota-āpanna, the fruit
of the sakṛdāgāmin, the fruit of the ānāgamin, the fruit of the arhat, or
the path of the pratyekabuddha. When they make the resolve to attain
bodhi, it is:
To prevent the lineage of the tathāgatas from being cut off;
To [enable the Dharma] to pervade all worlds;259
To liberate the beings in all worlds;
To fully know the creation and destruction of all worlds;
To fully know the defilement and purity of the beings in all worlds;
To fully know the purity of the nature of all worlds;
To fully know all beings’ mental dispositions, afflictions, and
habitual karmic propensities;
To fully know with regard to all beings their dying in this place
and their being born in that place;
To fully know all beings’ faculties and skillful means;
To fully know the mental actions of all beings;
To fully know the knowledge of all beings throughout the three
periods of time; and
To fully know the equality of the spheres of action of all buddhas.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there were a person who, in but a single mind-moment,
was able to go beyond an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to the east and then
was able to continue to do this for an entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. No
one would be able to know the bounds of these worlds through
which he passed.
Then suppose that there was a second person who was able in
but a single mind-moment to go beyond even more worlds than that
previous person had passed beyond during that entire asaṃkhyeya
kalpa, and assume also that he continued to do this for an entire
asaṃkhyeya kalpa. Assume, too, that, in this same manner, there
continued to be yet others up to the tenth such successive supersed­
ing of the previous person’s abilities even as this also occurred in
the same way in the south, the west, the north, the four midpoints,
the zenith, and the nadir.
Son of the Buddha, given that there were these hundred peo­
ple, each of whom had gone beyond all that many worlds, the far
boundaries of all these worlds might be knowable. Even so, there
still could never be anyone who could know the bounds of all the
roots of goodness acquired by the bodhisattva when making his
initial resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.

414

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Why is this? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not limited to
making the resolve to attain bodhi only to being able to completely
know just such a particular number of worlds as were passed in
such a circumstance. Rather, it is to completely know all worlds of
the ten directions that he makes the resolve to attain bodhi. That is
to say, he makes the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi:
Wishing to completely know that sublime worlds are just coarse
worlds, that coarse worlds are just sublime worlds, that upward-
facing worlds are just inverted worlds, that inverted worlds
are just upward-facing worlds, that small worlds are just large
worlds, that large worlds are just small worlds, that vast worlds
are just narrow worlds, that narrow worlds are just vast worlds,
that a single world is just an ineffable number of worlds, that
an ineffable number of worlds are just a single world, that
an ineffable number of worlds enter into a single world, that
a single world enters into an ineffable number of worlds, that
defiled worlds are just pure worlds, and that pure worlds are
just defiled worlds;
Wishing to know within the tip of a single hair the different
natures of all worlds and know the single essential nature of
the tip of a single hair in all worlds;
Wishing to know the production of all worlds within but a single
world;
Wishing to know all worlds as being devoid of any essential
nature at all; and
Wishing to completely and unimpededly know all the vast worlds
in the space of but a single mind-moment of mental attention.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a single
mind-moment, was able to know the number of kalpas involved in
the creation and destruction of an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to the east
and then continued in this way in each and every subsequent mind-
moment, doing so for an entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. There is no one
who would be able to know the bounds of the number of kalpas
involved. But now suppose that there was a second person who in
but a single mind-moment was able to know the number of kalpas
which the previous person took an entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa to know.
And then suppose that, when extensively described, there came to
be ten such persons [each of whom knew in a single mind-moment
what the previous person had taken an asaṃkhyeya of kalpas to
know] and suppose that, in this same way, this same circumstance

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
415
occurred in the south, the west, the north, the four midpoints, the
zenith, and the nadir.
Son of the Buddha, the bounds of the number of kalpas involved
in the creation and destruction of all of these asaṃkhyeyas of worlds
throughout the ten directions might be knowable. Even so, there
still could never be anyone who could know the bounds of the merit
and roots of goodness acquired by the bodhisattva when making
his initial resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Why is this? The bodhisattva is not limited to making the resolve
to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi only in order to completely know
the number of kalpas that transpired in the creation and destruc­
tion of just such a particular number of worlds. Rather, it is in order
to completely know all the kalpas without exception that trans­
pired in the creation and destruction of all worlds that he makes the
resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi. That is to say, he makes
the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi:
To know the equality of long kalpas with short kalpas and to
know the equality of short kalpas with long kalpas;
To know the equality of a single kalpa with innumerable kalpas
and to know the equality of innumerable kalpas with a single
kalpa;
To know the equality of kalpas in which there are buddhas with
kalpas in which there are no buddhas and to know the equality
of kalpas in which there are no buddhas with kalpas in which
there are buddhas;
To know that in a kalpa in which there is one buddha, there are
an ineffably large number of buddhas and to know that, in a
kalpa in which there are an ineffable number of buddhas, there
is one buddha;
To know the equality of measurable kalpas with immeasurable
kalpas and to know the equality of immeasurable kalpas with
measurable kalpas;
To know the equality of an exhaustible number of kalpas with an
inexhaustible number of kalpas and to know the equality of an
inexhaustible number of kalpas with an exhaustible number of
kalpas;
To know the equality of an ineffable number of kalpas and but a
single mind-moment and to know the equality of but a single
mind-moment and an ineffable number of kalpas;
To know all kalpas may enter into a non-kalpa260 and to know a
non-kalpa enters all kalpas; and

416

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Wishing to completely know in but a single mind-moment all the
kalpas involved in the creation and destruction of all worlds of
the past, the future, and the present periods of time.
This is what is referred to as the adornment of the great vow of
those who make the initial resolve, the knowledge of the spiritual
superknowledges by which one completely knows all kalpas.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in but a single mind-moment,
was able to know all the various different kinds of understandings
possessed by all beings in an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to the east and
then continued in this way in each succeeding mind-moment for an
entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. And then suppose that there was then a
second person who, in but a single mind-moment, was able to know
all the various different kinds of understandings possessed by all
beings that the previous person took an entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa
to know. Suppose, too, that he continued in this way for an entire
asaṃkhyeya kalpa and that then, in progressive succession, there
came to be ten such persons [each of whom knew in a single mind-
moment what the previous person had taken an asaṃkhyeya kalpa to
know], and suppose that, in this same way, this same circumstance
occurred in the south, the west, the north, the four midpoints, the
zenith, and the nadir.
Son of the Buddha, the bounds of the number of various differ­
ent understandings possessed by all these beings in the ten direc­
tions might be knowable. Even so, there still could never be anyone
who could know the bounds of the merit and roots of goodness
acquired by the bodhisattva when making his initial resolve to
attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only to know the understandings possessed by just such a particu­
lar number of beings. Rather, it is in order to completely know the
various different kinds of understandings possessed by all beings
in all worlds that he resolves to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi. That
is to say, he makes the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi:
Because he wishes to know all the boundlessly many different
kinds of understandings and because he wishes to know the
equality of a single being’s understanding with the under­
standings of innumerably many beings;
Because he wishes to acquire the light of the knowledge which
knows the skillful means appropriate to an ineffable number of
different understandings;

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
417
Because he wishes to completely know each and every one of the
different kinds of understandings possessed by everyone in the
ocean of all beings without exception;
Because he wishes to completely know all the countlessly many
different kinds of wholesome and unwholesome understand­
ings throughout the past, the present, and the future;
Because he wishes to completely know all the forms of semblance
understandings and non-semblance understandings;
Because he wishes to completely know all forms of understand­
ing as identical to a single form of understanding and know a
single form of understanding as identical to all forms of under­
standing;
Because he wishes to acquire the Tathāgata’s power of under­
standing;
Because he wishes to completely know the differences in those
understandings that are excelled by others, those under­
standings that are unexcelled, those understandings that still
have matters they do not include, those understandings that
have nothing they do not include, those understandings that
are equaled by others, and those understandings that are
unequaled by any others;
Because he wishes to completely know the differences in depen­
dent understandings and independent understandings, shared
understandings and exclusive understandings, bounded under­
standings and boundless understandings, differentiated under­
standings and non-differentiated understandings, wholesome
understandings and unwholesome understandings, worldly
understandings and world-transcending understandings;
Because he wishes to acquire the unimpeded knowledge of the
Tathāgata’s liberations with respect to all forms of marvelous
understanding, great understanding, measureless understand­
ing, and the understanding of the right and fixed position;261
Because he wishes to use countless skillful means to completely
know with regard to each and every being without exception in
all realms of beings throughout the ten directions all their pure
understandings and defiled understandings, their extensive
understandings and general understandings, and their subtle
understandings and coarse understandings; and
Because he wishes to completely know their extremely esoteric
understandings and provisional understandings, their dis­
criminating understandings and spontaneous understandings,
their understandings arising in accordance with causes, their

418

The Flower Adornment Sutra
understandings arising in accordance with conditions, and the
entire web of all their understandings without exception.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a single
mind-moment, was able to know all the different faculties pos­
sessed by all beings in innumerable worlds to the east and that
he continued in this way in each succeeding mind-moment for an
entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. Now suppose that there was then a second
person who, in the instant of but a single mind-moment was able
to know all the different faculties possessed by all beings that the
previous person took each succeeding mind-moment of an entire
asaṃkhyeya kalpa to know. And then suppose that, when extensively
described, there came to be ten such persons [each of whom knew
in a single mind-moment what the previous person had taken an
asaṃkhyeya of kalpas to know] and suppose that, in this same way,
this same circumstance occurred in the south, the west, the north,
the four midpoints, the zenith, and the nadir.
Son of the Buddha, the bounds of the different faculties of all
these beings in the worlds throughout the ten directions might be
knowable. Even so, there still could never be anyone who could
know the bounds of the merit and roots of goodness acquired by
the bodhisattva when making his initial resolve to attain anuttara-
samyak-saṃbodhi.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only in order to know the faculties possessed by the beings in just
such a particular number of worlds. Rather, it is in order to com­
pletely know all the various faculties of all beings in all worlds, and,
when extensively described, it is for the sake of all those other mat­
ters up to and including his wish to completely know the entire
net of all those beings’ faculties that he makes the resolve to attain
anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a sin­
gle mind-moment, was able to know the various inclinations262
of all beings in countless worlds to the east and suppose that he
continued in this way in each succeeding mind-moment for an
entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. And then suppose that, when extensively
described, there came to be ten such persons [each of whom knew
in a single mind-moment what the previous person had taken an
asaṃkhyeya of kalpas to know] and suppose that, in this same way,

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
419
this same circumstance occurred in the south, the west, the north,
the four midpoints, the zenith, and the nadir.
The bounds of all these inclinations of the beings throughout the
ten directions might be knowable. Even so, there still could never be
anyone who could know the bounds of the merit and roots of good­
ness acquired by the bodhisattva when making his initial resolve to
attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only in order to completely know the inclinations of just such a par­
ticular number of beings. Rather, it is in order to completely know
all of the various inclinations of all beings in all worlds and, when
extensively described, it is for the sake of all those other matters
up to and including his wish to completely know the entire net of
all those beings’ inclinations that he makes the resolve to attain
anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a single
mind-moment, was able to know the many different kinds of skillful
means appropriate to all beings in innumerable worlds to the east.
And then suppose that, when extensively described, there came to
be ten such persons [each of whom knew in a single mind-moment
what the previous person had taken an asaṃkhyeya of kalpas to
know] and suppose that, in this same way, this same circumstance
occurred in the south, the west, the north, the four midpoints, the
zenith, and the nadir.
The bounds of the many different kinds of skillful means appro­
priate to the beings throughout the ten directions might be know­
able. Even so, there still could never be anyone who could know
the bounds of the merit and roots of goodness acquired by the bod­
hisattva when making his initial resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-
saṃbodhi.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only in order to know the skillful means appropriate to the beings
in just such a particular number of worlds. Rather, it is in order to
completely know the many different kinds of skillful means appro­
priate to all beings in all worlds, and, when extensively described,
it is for the sake of all those other matters up to and including his
wish to completely know the entire net of skillful means that he
makes the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.

420

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a sin­
gle mind-moment, was able to know the many different kinds of
thoughts263 of all beings in innumerable worlds to the east. Then, in
accordance with the extensive description, we come to: the bounds
of these many different kinds of thoughts of all beings in the worlds
of the ten directions might be knowable. Even so, there still could
never be anyone who could know the bounds of the merit and roots
of goodness acquired by the bodhisattva when making the initial
resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only in order to know the thoughts of just such a particular number
of beings. Rather, it is in order to completely know all the many dif­
ferent thoughts of all the boundlessly many beings throughout the
entire Dharma realm and the realms of empty space, and so forth,
up to and including its being because he wishes to completely know
the entire net of all their thoughts that he makes the resolve to attain
anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a sin­
gle mind-moment, was able to know all the many different kinds
of karmic actions of all beings in innumerable worlds to the east.
Then, in accordance with the extensive description, we come to: the
bounds of these many different kinds of karmic actions of all beings
in the worlds of the ten directions might be knowable. Even so, the
bounds of the roots of goodness acquired by the bodhisattva when
making the initial resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi could
never be known.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only in order to know the karmic actions of just such a particular
number of beings. Rather, it is because of his wish to completely
know the karmic actions of all beings throughout the three peri­
ods of time, and so forth, up to and including its being because he
wishes to completely know the entire net of all their karmic actions
that he makes the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a single
mind-moment, was able to know all the various kinds of afflictions
of all beings in innumerable worlds to the east and suppose that
he continued in this way in each succeeding mind-moment for an

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
421
entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. There is no one who would be able to know
the bounds of the many different kinds of differences in all these
afflictions.
Now suppose that there was then a second person who, in the
instant of but a single mind-moment was able to know all the differ­
ences in all of the afflictions of all those beings that the former per­
son came to know only in an asaṃkhyeya kalpa. Suppose also that he
too continued in this way for an entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. And then
suppose that, when extensively described, there came to be ten such
persons [each of whom knew in a single mind-moment what the
previous person had taken an asaṃkhyeya of kalpas to know] and
suppose that, in this same way, this same circumstance occurred in
the south, the west, the north, the four midpoints, the zenith, and
the nadir.
Son of the Buddha, the bounds of the differences in the afflic­
tions of these beings throughout the ten directions might be know­
able. Even so, the bounds of the roots of goodness acquired by the
bodhisattva when making the initial resolve to attain anuttara-
samyak-saṃbodhi could never be known.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only in order to know the afflictions of the beings in just such a par­
ticular number of worlds. Rather, it is in order to completely know
the differences in the afflictions of all beings in all worlds that he
makes the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi. That is to say,
he makes the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi:
Because he wishes to exhaustively know the mild afflictions, the
severe afflictions, the latent afflictions, and the manifest afflic­
tions, the various differences in the measureless afflictions of
each and every being, and the many different kinds of associ­
ated ideation and discursion, this in order to bring about the
purification of all defilements;
Because he wishes to exhaustively know the afflictions dependent
on ignorance and the afflictions characterized by craving, this
in order to bring about the severance of all affliction-based fet­
ters involved in all the destinies of existence;
Because he wishes to exhaustively know all the greed-based afflic­
tions, the hatred-based afflictions, the delusion-based afflic­
tions, and the afflictions involving an equal share [of greed,
hatred, and delusion], this in order to bring about the severance
of the roots of all afflictions;

422

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Because he wishes to completely know the afflictions associated
with a self, the afflictions associated with the possessions of a
self, and the afflictions associated with arrogance, this in order
to bring about the awakening to all afflictions without excep­
tion;
Because he wishes to completely know the root afflictions and
subsidiary afflictions arising from inverted views and discrim­
inations and arising from the sixty-two views associated with
a body-based personality view, this in order to bring about the
subduing of all afflictions; and
Because he wishes to completely know the afflictions related to
the hindrances264 and the afflictions related to the obstacles,265
this in order to produce a greatly compassionate resolve to res­
cue beings, sever the net of all afflictions, and enable the purifi­
cation of the nature of omniscience.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
instead that there was a person who, in the instant of but a single
mind-moment, was able to make offerings to the innumerably many
buddhas in the east as well as to all the beings in those innumerable
worlds, making offerings of all different kinds of supremely fine-
flavored drinks and foods, incense, flowers, robes, banners, pen­
nants, parasols, and canopies, as well as saṃghāramas,266 supremely
marvelous palaces, jeweled tents, net curtains, lion thrones
adorned in many different ways, and the many kinds of marvel­
ous jewels, offering these with respect, reverence, full ceremonial
bows, praises, respectfully stooped bodies, and upwardly admir­
ing gazes, continuing do so without interruption for innumerably
many kalpas while also encouraging those beings, thus enabling
them all to make offerings to those buddhas in these same ways,
continuing to do so until, after those buddhas passed into nirvāṇa,
they then raised up stupas for each of them, stupas that were tall
and broad, present in countless worlds, made of the many kinds of
jewels, and graced with all kinds of different adornments, stupas
in each of which there were countless images of the Tathāgata, the
light from which everywhere illuminated those countlessly many
worlds. Suppose too that this person continued to do this in the
same way for innumerably many kalpas, doing so in the same way
in the south, the west, the north, the four midpoints, the zenith, and
the nadir.
Son of the Buddha, what do you think? Would that person’s
merit be abundant, or not?

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
423
Śakra Devānām Indra replied, “This person’s merit would be such
that only a buddha could know it. No one else would be able to
fathom it.”
[Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva then continued, saying]:
Son of the Buddha, even so, if one were to compare this person’s
merit to the merit acquired by the bodhisattva when making the
initial resolve, it would not amount to a hundredth part, would not
amount to a thousandth part, would not amount to a hundred-thou­
sandth part, and so forth on up to its not amounting to even a single
part in an upaniṣad267 of parts.
Son of the Buddha, again, setting aside this analogy, suppose
that there was then a second person who, in but a single mind-
moment, was able to accomplish that same number of offerings as
jointly accomplished by that previous person and all those beings in
those innumerably many worlds during those innumerably many
kalpas. Suppose as well that he continued in this same way in each
succeeding mind-moment, continuing throughout countless kalpas
to make offerings of countless kinds of offering gifts, offering them
to all those countlessly many buddhas, those tathāgatas, as well as to
all the beings in those countlessly many worlds.
Suppose as well that this circumstance continued to unfold in
the same way with a third person and then in sequential progres­
sion on through to a tenth person, all of whom were able in the
same way to accomplish in but a single mind-moment all the offer­
ings accomplished by each of the former persons, offering in this
same way in each successive mind-moment a boundless number,
an incomparable number, an innumerable number, an indescrib­
able number, an inconceivable number, an immeasurable number,
an ineffable number, and an ineffable-ineffable number of offering
gifts, offering them to all the boundlessly many, and so forth on up
to the ineffable-ineffable number of buddhas as well as to all the
beings in all those many worlds, doing so for a boundless num­
ber, and so forth on up to an ineffable-ineffable number of kalpas,
continuing to do so until, after those buddhas passed into nirvāṇa,
they then each raised up stupas, stupas that were tall and broad,
continuing to do so in the same way throughout the kalpas of exis­
tence.268
Son of the Buddha, if one were to compare this above-described
merit to the merit acquired by the bodhisattva when mak­
ing the initial resolve, it would not amount to a hundredth part,
would not amount to a thousandth part, would not amount to a

424

The Flower Adornment Sutra
hundred-thousandth part, and so forth on up to its not equaling
even a single part in an upaniṣad of parts.
And why is this so? Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva is not
limited to making the resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi
only in order to make offerings to just such a particular number of
buddhas. Rather, it is in order to make offerings to all the ineffably-
ineffably many countless buddhas of the ten directions through­
out the past, future, and present and throughout the entire Dharma
realm and the realms of empty space that he therefore makes the
resolve to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Having made this resolve, he then becomes able to know all bud­
dhas of the past, from the time of their first achieving realization
of right enlightenment on through to their entry into parinirvāṇa,
becomes able to believe in all the roots of goodness of all buddhas of
the future, and becomes able to know all the wisdom of all buddhas
of the present. This bodhisattva becomes able to believe in and take
on all the meritorious qualities of all of those buddhas, becomes
able to cultivate them, able to acquire them, able to know them, able
to realize them, and able to perfect them, and he becomes able to
become of the same single nature as all buddhas.
And why is this so? As for this bodhisattva:
It is to prevent the severance of the lineage of all the tathāgatas that
he makes the resolve;
To [enable the Dharma] to pervade all worlds that he makes the
resolve;
It is to liberate the beings in all worlds that he makes the resolve;
It is to completely know the creation and destruction of all worlds
that he makes the resolve;
It is to fully know the defilement and purity of all beings that he
makes the resolve;
It is to fully know the purity of the three realms of existence in all
worlds that he makes the resolve;
It is to fully know all beings’ inclinations, afflictions, and habitual
karmic propensities that he makes the resolve;
It is to fully know all beings’ dying in this place and being born in
that place that he makes the resolve;
It is to fully know all beings’ faculties and appropriate skillful
means that he makes the resolve;
It is to fully know the mental actions of all beings that he makes
the resolve; and
It is to fully know the knowledge of all beings throughout the
three periods of time that he makes the resolve.

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
425
Due to making the resolve:
He is always remembered by all buddhas of the three periods of
time;
He becomes bound to realize the unsurpassed bodhi of all bud­
dhas of the three periods of time;
He immediately becomes the recipient of the sublime Dharma
bestowed on him by all buddhas of the three periods of time;
He immediately becomes of the same essential nature as all bud­
dhas of the three periods of time;
Having already cultivated the dharmas of the provisions for the
path of all buddhas of the three periods of time, he perfects the
powers and fearlessnesses of all buddhas of the three periods
of time;
He adorns the dharmas exclusive to the buddhas of all buddhas of
the three periods of time; and
He acquires all the wisdom in speaking the Dharma possessed by
all buddhas throughout the Dharma realm.
And why is this the case? It is because, by this arousing of the
resolve, he becomes bound to attain buddhahood. One should
realize that this person then becomes the same as all buddhas of
the three periods of time, then attains the same sphere of cogni­
tion of all buddhas, the tathāgatas, of the three periods of time, then
achieves the same meritorious qualities as those of all buddhas, the
tathāgatas, of the three periods of time, and then acquires the genu­
ine wisdom that fathoms the ultimate identity of the Tathāgata’s one
body and his countless bodies.
Right at that time when he makes the resolve:
He is then praised in unison by all buddhas of the ten directions;
He is then able to speak Dharma and teach and train all beings in
all worlds;
He is then able to cause quaking and movement in all worlds;
He is then able to illuminate all worlds;
He is then able to extinguish the sufferings in the wretched desti­
nies in all worlds;
He is then able to purify all lands;
He is then able to manifest the realization of buddhahood in all
worlds;
He is then able to cause all beings to be filled with joyous delight;
He is then able to penetrate the nature of the entire Dharma realm;
He is then able to sustain the lineage of all buddhas; and
He is then able to acquire the light of all buddhas’ wisdom.

426

The Flower Adornment Sutra
This bodhisattva who has made the initial resolve does not have
even the slightest thing within the three periods of time that he
obtains. That is to say, whether it be in relation to the buddhas, the
Dharma of the buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the Dharma of the bod­
hisattvas, the pratyekabuddhas, the Dharma of the pratyekabuddhas,
the śrāvaka disciples, the Dharma of the śrāvaka disciples, the world,
the dharmas of the world, the transcendence of the world, the dhar­
mas of world transcendence, beings, or the dharmas of beings, he
only seeks all-knowledge. His mind is free of any attachment to any
of the dharma realms.269
At that time, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, worlds in each
of the ten directions as numerous as the atoms in a myriad buddha
kṣetras all moved and shook in six ways. That is to say, they experi­
enced: movement, universal movement, equal-and-universal move­
ment; rising, universal rising, equal-and-universal rising; upward
thrusting, universal upward thrusting, equal-and-universal upward
thrusting; shaking, universal shaking, equal-and-universal shaking;
roaring, universal roaring, equal-and-universal roaring; striking,
universal striking, and equal-and-universal striking.
It rained down marvelous celestial flowers, celestial incense, pow­
dered celestial incense, celestial floral chaplets, celestial robes, celes­
tial jewels, and celestial adornments. This was accompanied by the
playing of celestial music, and by the emanation of celestial radiance
and celestial sounds.
At that time, from beyond a number of worlds off in each of the
ten directions as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, bud­
dhas as numerous as the atoms in a myriad buddha kṣetras, all of
them named “Dharma Wisdom,” all manifested their bodies directly
before Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva and spoke these words:
It is good indeed, good indeed, Dharma Wisdom, that you have now
been able to proclaim this Dharma. We buddhas from each of the
ten directions who are each as numerous as the atoms in a myriad
buddha kṣetras all also proclaim this Dharma. All other buddhas
also proclaim it in this way. When you proclaimed this Dharma,
bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in a myriad buddha kṣetras
all resolved to attain bodhi. We all now bestow a prediction on them
that in a future age, beyond a thousand ineffable numbers of bound­
less kalpas, they will all succeed in attaining buddhahood during
the same single kalpa and, when they appear in the world, they will
all be called “Pure Mind Tathāgata.” All the worlds in which they

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
427
dwell will each be different. We shall all protect and support this
Dharma and enable all bodhisattvas of the future who have not yet
heard it to succeed in hearing it.
Just as, on the summit of Mount Sumeru, above the four conti­
nents of this Sahā world, you have proclaimed such Dharma and
enabled the beings who have heard it to receive its transformative
teaching, so too, in this same way, they proclaim this Dharma and
teach beings throughout the ten directions in all the hundreds of
thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of countlessly many, measurelessly
many, boundlessly many, incomparably many, innumerably many,
indescribably many, inconceivably many, immeasurably many, and
ineffably many numbers of worlds throughout the Dharma realm
and the realms of empty space. Those proclaiming this Dharma
are all identically named “Dharma Wisdom.” They all proclaim
Dharma such as this:
Due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers;
Due to the power of the Bhagavat’s original vows;
Due to a wish to reveal the Dharma of the Buddha;
To use the light of wisdom to produce universal illumination;
Due to a wish to explain the genuine meaning;
To enable beings to realize the nature of dharmas;
To enable the congregations to be filled with joyous delight;
Due to a wish to reveal the Buddha Dharma’s causality;
To realize the equality of all buddhas; and
To comprehend the non-duality of the Dharma realm.
At that time, Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed all the congre­
gations in the lands of the ten directions throughout the realms of
space, and:
Because he wished to fully perfect all beings;
Because he wished to fully purify all actions, results, and consequences;
Because he wished to fully reveal the pure Dharma realm;
Because he wished to fully extirpate all roots of defilement;
Because he wished to fully enable the growth of vast resolute faith;
Because he wished to fully enable the knowledge of the faculties of
countless beings;
Because he wished to fully enable the knowledge of the identity of the
dharmas of the three periods of time;
Because he wished to fully enable the contemplation of the realm of
nirvāṇa; and
Because he wished to enable the growth in all their own roots of good­
ness—

428

The Flower Adornment Sutra
With the assistance of the Buddha’s awesome powers, he then spoke
these verses:
To serve the benefit of the world, he makes the great resolve.
His resolve extends everywhere throughout the ten directions
to all beings and all lands, to all dharmas of the three periods of time,
and to the ocean of the supreme ones, the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
To all the worlds to the very ends of empty space
equal in vastness to the entire Dharma realm,
in accordance with all buddhas’ Dharma, he goes and visits them all,
and in this way arouses the irreversible resolve.
Kindly mindful of beings, never forsaking them for even a moment,
abandoning all harming, and benefiting them all,
his radiance illuminates the world and he serves as their refuge,
held in inconceivable guarding mindfulness of the One of Ten Powers.
He enters all lands throughout the ten directions,
manifests appearances in every form, and,
according with the Buddha’s vast and boundless merit and wisdom,
he pursues the cultivation of their causes and stays free of attachment.
Some kṣetras face upward, some laterally, and some are inverted.
In their coarseness, sublimity, and vastness, there are countless kinds.
By a single instance of arousing the supreme resolve, the bodhisattva
becomes unimpeded in his ability to travel to them all.
The bodhisattva’s supreme practices are ineffably numerous.
He diligently cultivates them all, yet has nowhere in which he abides.
When he sees all buddhas, he is always pleased and happy,
and everywhere enters their deep ocean of Dharma.
He feels deep sympathy for the many beings within the five destinies270
and enables them to become rid of defilements and thoroughly pure.
He carries on the buddhas’ lineage, prevents it from being cut off,
and demolishes all of Māra’s palaces, leaving none remaining.
He already dwells in the tathāgatas’ uniformly equal nature
and skillfully cultivates the path of subtle skillful means.
He arouses a mind of faith in the Buddha’s sphere of action,
receives the Buddha’s consecration, and has a mind free of attachment.
He remembers to repay the kindness of the Most Revered of Beings271
and develops a resolve like vajra which cannot be obstructed.
He is able to completely illuminate the Buddha’s practices
and naturally cultivates those practices leading to bodhi.
The different kinds of thinking of those in the destinies are countless.
Their karma, retributions, and mental deeds are also not of one type.

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
429
So too it is with the many differences in the nature of their faculties.
Once he makes the great resolve, he clearly perceives them all.
His mind is so vast as to be commensurate with the Dharma realm.
It depends on nothing, does not change, and is like empty space.
Going toward the Buddha’s wisdom, he does not seize on anything,
truly knows the apex of reality, and has abandoned discriminations.
He knows beings’ minds, yet generates no conception of any being,
completely comprehends dharmas, yet has no concept of any dharma.
Though he everywhere discriminates, he is free of all discriminations,
and thus travels to a nayuta of kṣetras to pay his respects.
He accords with, contemplates, and is able to completely enter
the treasury of wondrous Dharma of all the countless buddhas.
Of all beings’ faculties and practices, there are none he does not know.
In reaching such a station, he becomes like the bhagavats themselves.
He forever accords with his pure and great vows
and never retreats from his delight in making offerings to tathāgatas.
When humans or devas see him, they never get enough of seeing him,
and he is always recalled with protective mindfulness by all buddhas.
His mind is pure and it has nothing it depends on.
Though he contemplates deep dharmas, he still does not cling to them.
Even if he were to reflect on them in this manner for countless kalpas,
he would still be free of attachment to any of them in the three times.
With his steadfast resolve that is impossible to restrain or obstruct,
he is unimpeded in proceeding toward the Buddha’s bodhi.
Resolutely seeking the wondrous path, he does away with delusions.
Even traveling the entire Dharma realm, he never pleads weariness.
Realizing that the dharmas of language are all quiescent,
only by entering true suchness, he dispels all deviant understandings.
He pursues the contemplation of all buddhas’ spheres of cognition
and his mind is unimpeded in comprehending all in the three times.
From when he first makes his great resolve, the bodhisattva
is then able to travel everywhere to the kṣetras of the ten directions.
Though the Dharma gateways are measurelessly and ineffably many,
with the light of wisdom’s universal illumination, he knows them all.
His great compassion is peerless in its extensive liberation of beings,
the pervasiveness of his mind of kindness is equal to that of space,
and thus he does not discriminate among beings.
It is with purity such as this that he roams throughout the worlds.
He comforts and brings peace to all beings of the ten directions.
Everything that he does is always genuine.

430

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He constantly uses a pure mind that does not differ from his words
and is always jointly assisted and protected by all buddhas.
He recalls everything throughout the past,
clearly discerns everything in the future,
and everywhere enters the worlds of the ten directions
in order to liberate beings and thus enable their emancipation.
The bodhisattva fully possesses the light of marvelous wisdom
and thoroughly fathoms causes and conditions, free of all doubts.
He has entirely cut off all delusions
and thus roams in this way throughout the Dharma realm.
He completely destroys the palaces of the king of the māras,
does away with the cataracts obscuring the vision of beings,
abandons all discriminations, maintains an unmoving mind,
and thoroughly comprehends the Tathāgata’s spheres of action.
He has gotten rid of the net of doubts regarding the three times
and has aroused pure faith in the Tathāgata.
Due to his faith, he has succeeded in developing unshakable wisdom,
and because his wisdom is pure, he comprehends reality.
For the sake of enabling beings to succeed in attaining emancipation,
he strives to the end of future time to benefit them all,
and for a long time endures intense suffering with unwearied mind,
even to the point of being willing to calmly endure the hells.
His measureless merit and wisdom are both completely fulfilled.272
He completely knows beings’ faculties and inclinations
as well as all their karma and actions, having none he does not see.
Thus he speaks Dharma for them adapted to their dispositions.
He completely realizes that everything is empty and devoid of self,
yet bears beings in mind with kindness, never forsaking them,
as, with a single greatly compassionate and sublime voice,273
he everywhere enters the world and expounds the teachings.
He emanates great light in all kinds of different colors
which everywhere illuminates beings, dispelling their darkness.
Within the light, there are bodhisattvas seated on lotus blossoms,
revealing and propagating the pure Dharma for the benefit of beings.
On the tip of but a single hair, he manifests the many kṣetras
which are all filled with great bodhisattvas.
Though the wisdom of those in each congregation varies,
they are all able to fully understand the minds of beings.
Though the worlds of the ten directions are ineffably numerous,
in but a single mind-moment, he travels to them all without exception,

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
431
benefiting beings, making offerings to the buddhas,
and inquiring of the buddhas about the profound meanings.
He conceives of all tathāgatas as like fathers and,
to benefit beings, cultivates the practices leading to enlightenment.
With wisdom that is skillful, he penetrates the treasury of Dharma
and enters the station of deep wisdom, free of all attachments.
Expounding on the Dharma realm in accordance with his reflections,
he could continue for countless kalpas and still never reach the end.
Though his wisdom thoroughly penetrates, it has no place it abides.
He is ever free of weariness and is entirely free of all attachments.
Born into the clan of all buddhas of the three periods of time,
he attains by realization the Tathāgata’s marvelous Dharma body.
He everywhere manifests many forms for the many kinds of beings,
and, in this, he is like a conjurer who has nothing he cannot create.
He may appear as beginning to cultivate especially supreme practices,
may appear as having just taken birth, or as leaving the home life,
may appear beneath the bodhi tree, achieving the realization of bodhi,
or may, for beings’ sake, display the appearance of entering nirvāṇa.
The rare Dharma in which the bodhisattva abides
is a realm for buddhas only and is not a realm of the Two Vehicles.
They have done away with all conceptions of body, speech, and mind,
yet are able wherever fitting to manifest them in many different ways.
As for the dharmas of the buddhas the bodhisattva has acquired,
were beings to contemplate them, they would thus be driven mad.
In wisdom’s penetration of ultimate reality, his mind is unimpeded,
and he everywhere manifests a tathāgata’s sovereign powers.
In this he has no peer anywhere in the world,
how much the less as he further increases his extraordinary practices?
Although he has not yet fully perfected all-knowledge,
he has already acquired the Tathāgata’s sovereign powers.
He already abides in the ultimate path of the One Vehicle,
has already deeply entered the sublime and supreme Dharma,
skillfully knows with regard to beings what is timely or not timely,
and, in order to benefit them, manifests his spiritual superknowledges.
His division bodies fill up all kṣetras
and emanate pure light which dispels the world’s darkness.
Like the dragon king who creates the great clouds,
he everywhere rains the wondrous rain, totally drenching everything.
He contemplates beings as like mere conjurations or dreams
who, by the power of karma, forever drift along in cyclic existence.

432

The Flower Adornment Sutra
With great compassion and deep sympathy, he rescues them all
and speaks for them about the unconditioned pure nature of dharmas.
Just as the Buddha’s powers are incalculable, so too it is for these.
Like empty space, they are boundless.
In order to enable beings to attain liberation,
he diligently cultivates for a koṭī of kalpas, and yet he still is tireless.
With marvelous qualities arising from various meditative reflections,
he skillfully cultivates the unexcelled and foremost karmic works.
Never relinquishing any of the supreme practices,
he especially bears in mind the development of all-knowledge.
From a single body, he manifests countless bodies
with which he pervades all worlds everywhere.
His mind is pure and free of discriminations.
Just so are his inconceivable powers arising in a single mind-moment.
He does not engage in discriminations about anything in any world
and stays free of any erroneous conceptions about any dharmas.
Although he contemplates dharmas, he still does not seize upon them.
He constantly rescues beings, even as there is no one who is liberated.
All worlds consist only of perceptions
in which there are many different kinds of individual distinctions.
Knowing perceptions’ spheres of experience are dangerous and deep,
he manifests spiritual powers for beings to save and liberate them.
Like a master conjurer possessed of sovereign powers—
the bodhisattva’s spiritual transformations are also just like this.
His bodies pervade the Dharma realm as well as empty space
where, adapting to the minds of beings, none of them fail to see him.
He has abandoned discriminations of both the subjective and objective
and, whether defilement or purity, he has nothing on which he seizes.
Whether it be bondage or liberation, his wisdom forgets them both.
He wishes only to bestow happiness on all beings.
All worlds are created by the power of perceptions.
Using wisdom he enters them with a mind that is fearless.
Reflecting on all dharmas, he finds they are all of this same sort.
Thus even the three times, when investigated, cannot be apprehended.
He is able to enter the past and exhaust its prior boundaries,
is able to enter the future and exhaust its latter boundaries,
and is able to enter everywhere in the present time.
By always diligently contemplating, he finds that nothing at all exists.
By according with nirvāṇa’s dharma of quiescence,
he abides in noncontention and has nothing on which he depends.

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
433
His mind accords with ultimate reality, is utterly without peer,
and is forever irreversible in progressing solely toward bodhi.
In cultivating all supreme practices, he never retreats in fear,
but rather is securely established in bodhi, remaining unwavering.
The buddhas, the bodhisattvas, and the world—
throughout the Dharma realm, he fully comprehends them all.
One aspiring to realize the most supreme and foremost of paths
and become a king of all-knowledge and liberation
should swiftly arouse the resolve to attain bodhi,
forever put an end to the contaminants, and benefit the many beings.
The resolve which is pure in progressing toward bodhi
produces such vast merit that it is indescribable.
Even so, to benefit beings, it is here described.
All of you worthies should listen closely to this.
Even if one reduced all the countless worlds to atoms,
countless kṣetras would still be found in each and every atom,
and in each of them the buddhas would still all be countless.
He is able to clearly see them all, yet has nothing on which he seizes.
He is skillful in knowing beings, yet has no conception of any being,
and is skillful in knowing speech, yet has no conception of any speech.
His mind is unimpeded in all worlds.
He thoroughly knows them all, yet has nothing to which he attaches.
His mind which is as vast as empty space
clearly comprehends all phenomena of the three periods of time.
It has completely extinguished all doubts
and rightly contemplates the Buddha’s Dharma, free of any grasping.
In a single mind-moment, he visits the ten directions’ countless lands
even as his mind remains free of any attachment.
He fully comprehends the dharmas of the world’s many sufferings
as all abiding in the unproduced, in ultimate reality.
To all the countless and inconceivably many abodes of all buddhas—
he travels to all their assemblies and then pays his respects to them,
always serving as a supreme leader who inquires of the tathāgatas
about the vows and conduct cultivated by bodhisattvas.
His mind always recalls the buddhas of the ten directions,
yet it has nothing on which it relies and nothing on which it seizes.
He constantly encourages beings to plant roots of goodness,
to adorn their lands, and to enable their purification.
He uses his unimpeded vision to contemplate
all beings in all the stations of the three realms of existence

434

The Flower Adornment Sutra
and thus clearly sees all their countlessly and boundlessly many
habitual propensities, natures, faculties, and understandings.
He completely knows all the mental dispositions of beings
and thus accords with what is fitting in speaking Dharma for them.
He has a penetrating understanding of all defilement and purity,
and thus enables them to cultivate and rectify them and enter the path.
The bodhisattva is able to enter in but a single mind-moment
all of the countless and innumerable samādhis
and achieve sovereign mastery in the skillful and complete knowing
of all their perceptions, knowledge, and objects of attention.
The bodhisattva acquires this vast wisdom,
swiftly proceeds, unimpeded, toward bodhi,
and, wishing to benefit the many kinds of beings,
propagates the Dharma of the great man in place after place.
He well knows the worlds and both long and short kalpas
lasting so little as a month, half-month, or a mere day and night,
knows the differences in each land as well as their identical nature,
and, in always diligently contemplating them, he is never neglectful.
He goes forth everywhere to visit all the worlds of the ten directions
and yet remains free of any seizing on any region or place.
He purifies all lands without exception,
yet still has never made any discriminations regarding their purity.
What is and is not possible with regard to beings
as well as the differences in retributions their karmic deeds elicit—
Pursuing such reflections, he penetrates the powers of the buddhas
and thus completely knows all of these matters.274
All the various kinds of natures in all worlds, all the various kinds of
practices of those abiding within the three realms of existence, and
their sharp faculties as well as their middling and inferior faculties—
he deeply contemplates all such matters as these.
All their different kinds of pure and impure understandings,
whether supreme, inferior, or middling—he sees them all clearly.
The endpoints of practices pursued by all beings and their continuity
within the three realms of existence—he is able to explain them all.
The dhyāna absorptions, liberations, and samādhis,
the differences occurring in the arising of defiled or pure causes,
and the differences in sufferings and happiness due to earlier lives—
By purely cultivating the Buddha’s powers, he is able to see them all.
The continuity in beings’ karma and afflictions in all the destinies,
severance of this [continuity] in the destinies, attainment of cessation,

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
435
the perpetual non-arising of the many dharmas of the contaminants
or their seeds of the habitual propensities—he knows them all entirely.
The Tathāgata has completely done away with all the afflictions.
The light of his great wisdom illuminates the world.
Although the bodhisattva has not yet attained the realization
of the Buddha’s ten powers, still, he is free of all doubts about them.
Within but a single hair pore, the bodhisattva
is able to reveal the countless kṣetras of the ten directions.
Some have defilements and some are pure.
He is able to fully understand how they are created by various actions.
In but a single atom, there are countless kṣetras,
countless buddhas, and sons of the Buddha.
All the kṣetras are each distinct and free of any disorder or mixing.
Just as with but a single one, so too, he clearly sees them all.
In but a single hair pore, he sees in the ten directions,
all of the worlds throughout realm of empty space
in which there is not a single place that is without a buddha.
All buddha kṣetras such as these are all entirely pure.
Within a single hair pore, he sees the buddha kṣetras
and also sees all of their beings.
In the six destinies and three times, each of them is different, for,
in a day-and-night or a month, they may be in bondage or liberated.
Such greatly wise bodhisattvas as these
proceeding with focused mind toward the station of the Dharma King
pursue reflections about the station in which the buddhas dwell
and thus thereby acquire boundlessly great joyous delight.
The bodhisattva’s countless koṭīs of division bodies
make offerings to all tathāgatas.
His manifestations of superknowledges are incomparably supreme.
Thus is he able to abide in the Buddha’s sphere of action.
In the presence of all the countless buddhas, he ever strives for truth,
immerses himself in the flavors of all their treasuries of Dharma,
sees the buddhas, hears the Dharma, and is diligent in cultivation.
Thus his mind’s joyous delight is as if sipping the elixir of immortality.
He has already acquired the Tathāgata’s supreme samādhis,
has skillfully penetrated dharmas and developed increased wisdom,
has established a mind of faith as unshakable as Mount Sumeru,
and everywhere serves beings as a treasury of meritorious qualities.
As his mind of kindness is vast, it extends to all beings
so that he wishes that they all will swiftly realize all-knowledge.

436

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Still, he is always free of attachments, has nothing he depends on,
and has gained sovereign mastery in abandoning all the afflictions.
With deep sympathy for beings and vast wisdom,
he gathers them all in, regarding them as the same as himself.
He realizes they are all empty, signless, and devoid of reality,
yet still carries forth his resolve, not allowing it to diminish or retreat.
The measure of the bodhisattva’s merit in arousing the resolve
could not be exhaustively proclaimed even in a koṭī of kalpas
because it is what brings forth all the tathāgatas
and all happiness experienced by pratyekabuddhas or śrāvaka disciples.
If, for countless kalpas, he bestowed peace on all beings
throughout the lands of the ten directions, encouraging them
to uphold the five precepts, the ten courses of good karmic action,
the four dhyānas, four equal minds,275 and the stations of absorption,276
and if, for many kalpas, he also bestowed happiness [on all beings]
by enabling them to cut off all delusions and realize arhatship,
although his resulting accumulation of merit would be immeasurable,
it could not even compare with his merit from making the resolve.
If he also taught koṭīs of congregations to become pratyekabuddhas
and gain the sublime path of the practice of noncontentiousness,
and one compared that with [the merit of] resolving to attain bodhi,
still, no calculation or analogy could succeed [in comparing them].
If, in but a mind-moment, one could go beyond kṣetras as many
as the atoms in a kṣetra, continuing in this way for countless kalpas,
the number of these kṣetras one had passed might still be calculated.
However, one still could never know the merit of making the resolve.
The number of all kalpas in the past, future, and present
is boundless and measureless,
but the number of those kalpas might still be known.
Still, no one could ever fathom the merit of arousing the resolve.
This is because the bodhi mind277 pervades the ten directions,
has none of the distinctions within them it does not know,
clearly comprehends all three periods of time in but a single instant,
and benefits countless beings.
Though one might be able to fathom
the desires, understandings, suitable expedients, and mental actions
of all beings throughout the worlds of the ten directions,
the merit of making the resolve would still be difficult to measure.
The bodhisattva’s vows are commensurate with the ten directions
and his mind of kindness extends everywhere to all the many beings,

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
437
all of whom he enables to cultivate and realize the Buddha’s qualities.
For these reasons his powers are utterly boundless.
Beings’ desires, understandings, mental dispositions,
faculties, suitable expedients, and practices all differ.
He is able to completely know them all in but a single mind-moment
with a mind equal to one possessed of the wisdom of all-knowledge.
The deluded actions of all beings
continue without interruption in the three realms of existence.
Though the bounds of these might still be known,
the merit of making the resolve is inconceivable.
By making the resolve, one is able to abandon karma and afflictions
and then make offerings to all tathāgatas.
Having abandoned karma and delusions, their continuity is severed,
whereupon one gains liberation throughout the three periods of time.
One might in one mind-moment make offerings to countless buddhas
and also make offerings to numberless beings,
presenting them all with incense, flowers, and marvelous chaplets,
jewel banners, pennants, canopies, supremely fine robes,
exquisite foods, jeweled thrones, places for walking meditation,
various kinds of palaces, all graced with fine adornments,
marvelous and precious vairocana jewels,
and maṇi wishing pearls radiating dazzling light,
sustaining such offerings in every succeeding mind-moment
throughout a countless number of inconceivably long kalpas.
Though this person’s accumulated merit would grow ever greater,
it still could never rival the immense merit of making the resolve.
Among all the many different kinds of analogies one might utter,
there are none which could compare to the resolve to attain bodhi,
for all those most revered among all humans of the three times
were all born from producing this very resolve.
[The merit of] making the resolve is unimpeded and limitless.
If one sought to know its full measure, it could never be found,
for, having vowed to certainly attain the wisdom of all-knowledge,
he is bound to forever liberate all beings.
The vastness of the resolve is commensurate with all of space
and it produces all meritorious qualities equal to the Dharma realm.
The pervasive presence of his practices are the same, no different.
He forever leaves the many attachments, becoming equal to a buddha.
Of all the gateways to the Dharma, there are none he does not enter.
He becomes able to travel to all lands,

438

The Flower Adornment Sutra
gains penetrating comprehension of the sphere of all-knowledge,
and brings about the perfection of all the meritorious qualities.
He is constantly continuous in his ability to relinquish everything,
purifies all classes of moral precepts, becomes free of all attachments,
completely fulfills the unexcelled great meritorious qualities,
and, ever diligent and vigorous, he never retreats.
He enters deep dhyāna absorptions and always carries on reflections
which all correspond to the sphere of vast wisdom.
This is the most supreme of the bodhisattva’s grounds
which gives birth to all the paths of Samantabhadra.
Of all the tathāgatas throughout the three periods of time,
none are not protectively mindful of he who makes the initial resolve.
All join in assisting him with the adornments of samādhis, dhāraṇīs,
and transformations produced by the spiritual superknowledges.
The beings throughout the ten directions are measureless.
So too is this so of all worlds and the realm of empty space.
The measurelessness of making the resolve surpasses even those.
It is therefore able to give birth to all buddhas.
The resolve to attain bodhi is the very root of the ten powers
and is also the root of the four types of eloquence and fearlessnesses.
So too it is with the eighteen exclusive dharmas.
None of them are not acquired through making the resolve.
The bodies of the buddhas adorned with the physical marks
as well as their identical marvelous Dharma body
and the wisdom and nonattachment of those worthy of offerings—
These are all acquired due to having made the resolve.
All the bliss associated with the form realm dhyāna samādhis
of the pratyekabuddha and śrāvaka vehicles
as well as that associated with the formless realm samādhis—
These are all acquired due to having made the resolve.
Of all the freely-acquired pleasures of humans and devas,
the various pleasures in all the destinies, and the many other pleasures
arising from the vigor and concentration of the roots and powers,278
there are none that do not arise from having made the initial resolve.
It is due to bringing forth the vast resolve
that one is then able to cultivate the six perfections
and encourage other beings to practice right actions
whereby they acquire happiness within the three realms of existence.
He dwells in the Buddha’s unimpeded genuine wisdom,
reveals and explains all the wondrous karmic works,

Chapter 17 — The Merit of the Initial Resolve
439
and is able to thus cause countless beings
to cut off all deluded karma and proceed toward nirvāṇa.
The light of his wisdom is like that of the clearly shining sun,
his complete fulfillment of the manifold practices is like the full moon,
his constant abundance of meritorious qualities is like a vast ocean,
and his unimpeded immaculate purity is like that of empty space.
He everywhere makes vows with boundless meritorious qualities
and bestows happiness on all beings.
To the very ends of the future, he practices in accordance with vows
and is always diligent in cultivating the practice of liberating beings.
With his countless inconceivable great vows,
he vows to enable all beings to attain purity.
By emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, he depends on nothing,
yet, by the power of vows, these all become clearly revealed.279
He fully knows that dharmas by nature are like space
and that they are all quiescent and hence all the same.
The countlessly and ineffably many gateways into the Dharma—
he teaches them for beings without any attachment.
All tathāgatas throughout the worlds of the ten directions
join in praising those who make the initial resolve.
This resolve280 is adorned with measureless meritorious qualities
by which it enables one to reach the far shore, the same as the Buddha.
Even if one described its meritorious qualities for kalpas
as numerous as all beings, one could still never reach the end of them.
Because [it leads to] dwelling in the vast clan of the tathāgatas,
there is no dharma in the three realms that is able to compare to it.
If one wishes to know the Dharma of all buddhas,
one should swiftly arouse the resolve to attain bodhi.
This resolve is the most excellent of meritorious qualities, for,
because of it, one will certainly gain a tathāgata’s unimpeded wisdom.
One might be able to count up the thoughts and actions of all beings.
So too might one do so with the atoms in all lands.
Or perhaps one could measure the boundaries of empty space.
Still, no one could fathom the merit of making this resolve.
It gives birth to all buddhas of the three periods of time,
establishes all forms of happiness throughout the worlds,
increases all the supreme meritorious qualities,
and forever severs all doubts.
It reveals all the marvelous spheres of experience,
entirely rids one of all kinds of obstacles,

440

The Flower Adornment Sutra
brings about the complete development of all the pure kṣetras,
and gives birth to the wisdom of all the tathāgatas.
If one wishes to see all buddhas throughout the ten directions,
wishes to bestow the endless treasury of meritorious qualities,
and wishes to extinguish all the sufferings and anguish of beings,
One should swiftly arouse the resolve to realize bodhi.
The End of Chapter Seventeen

Chapter 18
Clarifying the Dharma
At that time, Vigorous Wisdom Bodhisattva addressed Dharma
Wisdom Bodhisattva, saying:
O Son of the Buddha, when bodhisattva-mahāsattvas first arouse
the resolve to seek all-knowledge, they become accomplished in
measureless meritorious qualities such as these, become equipped
with the great adornments, ascend into the vehicle of all-knowl­
edge, enter the bodhisattva’s right and definite position,281 relin­
quish all worldly dharmas, acquire the Buddha’s world-transcend­
ing Dharma, are drawn forth into the company of all buddhas of the
past, future, and present, and become certain to reach the ultimate
station of unexcelled bodhi.
How should those bodhisattvas then cultivate and practice the
Buddha’s teachings so that:
They cause all tathāgatas to be delighted;
They enter the stations in which bodhisattvas dwell;
They accomplish the purification of all the great practices;
They cause all the great vows to be fulfilled;
They acquire the vast treasury of all bodhisattvas;
They adapt to the beings they should transform and always speak
Dharma for them;
They never abandon the pāramitā practices;
They enable the liberation of all beings of whom they are mindful;
They continue the lineage of the Three Jewels and ensure that it is
never cut off; and
They ensure that their skillful means and roots of goodness are
not implemented in vain?
Son of the Buddha, by using which skillful means will those bod­
hisattvas be able to cause this Dharma to become completely ful­
filled? I only wish that you will bestow your deep sympathy on us
and expound on these matters for our sakes. Of those in this great
assembly, there are none who would not delight in hearing these
matters explained.
Moreover, [please also explain] in accordance with [the practices
of] the bodhisattva-mahāsattvas:

442

The Flower Adornment Sutra
How they are always diligent in cultivation;
How they extinguish all the darkness of ignorance;
How they defeat Māra, the adversary;
How they restrain the non-Buddhist traditions;
How they forever rinse away all afflictions and mental defile­
ments;
How they are able to fully develop all roots of goodness;
How they forever escape all the wretched destinies and
difficulties;282
How they purify all the spheres of cognition of their great wis­
dom;
How they perfect the pure meritorious qualities of all the bod­
hisattva grounds, the pāramitās, the complete-retention dhāraṇīs,
the samādhis, the six spiritual superknowledges, the three clar­
ities, and the four fearlessnesses;
How they accomplish the adornment of the lands of all buddhas
as well as that of all the major marks and subsidiary signs;
How they accomplish the complete fulfillment of the conduct of
body, speech, and mind;
How they come to thoroughly know the sphere of action of the
powers, the fearlessnesses, the dharmas exclusive to the bud­
dhas, and the wisdom of all-knowledge possessed by all bud­
dhas, the tathāgatas;
How, in order to ripen beings, they adapt to their mental disposi­
tions in selecting buddha lands;
How they adapt to beings’ faculties and the right time in appro­
priately speaking Dharma for them;
How they achieve the complete fulfillment of various and count­
less vast buddha works as well as the other countless meritori­
ous dharmas, paths, and spheres of cognition and then swiftly
develop meritorious qualities equal to those of the Tathāgata;
How they are able to preserve, protect, and expound upon every­
thing in the Dharma treasury accumulated by the tathāgatas, the
rightly enlightened ones, throughout hundreds of thousands of
asaṃkhyeyas of kalpas during which they cultivated the bod­
hisattva conduct, remaining unimpeded by any of the māras or
adherents of non-Buddhist traditions, and endlessly accumu­
lated and preserved right Dharma;
How, when they expound on the Dharma in all worlds, they are
protected by all the deva kings, dragon kings, yakṣa kings, gand­
harva kings, asura kings, garuḍa kings, kiṃnara kings, mahoraga
kings, human kings, Brahma Heaven kings, and the tathāgatas,
the Dharma Kings;

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
443
How, in all worlds, they receive reverence and offerings, the bud­
dhas’ joint crown-anointing consecration, the perpetual protec­
tive mindfulness of the buddhas, and the fond respect of all
bodhisattvas; and
How they acquire the power of roots of goodness, increase
the dharmas of pristine purity, expound on the Tathāgata’s
extremely profound Dharma treasury, and adopt and retain
right Dharma as their adornment.
Please expound on the sequence of these practices of all bodhisat­
tvas.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning, Vigorous Wisdom
Bodhisattva then spoke these verses:
The greatly renowned one is well able to expound
on the meritorious dharmas accomplished by the bodhisattvas,
their deep penetration of the boundlessly many vast practices,
and their fulfillment of the pure wisdom attained without a teacher.
If there be bodhisattvas who, having made the initial resolve,
have become accomplished in the vehicle of merit and wisdom,
have entered the station of forsaking births, gone beyond the world,
and acquired the dharmas of the right and universal bodhi,
how do they additionally, in the Buddha’s teachings,
strengthen diligent cultivation, achieve ever greater supremacy,
cause the tathāgatas to be delighted, and
become bound to swiftly enter the ground where the Buddha dwells?
[How do they] attain purity of practice, fulfill all their vows,
and also acquire a vast treasury of wisdom,
always being able to speak Dharma to liberate beings,
even as their minds stay free of dependencies and free of attachments?
[How are they] able to skillfully cultivate without deficiency
all the pāramitās of the bodhisattvas,
rescue and liberate all the beings of whom they are mindful,
and always sustain the Buddha’s lineage and prevent its severance?
How is whatever they do solidly established and not done in vain
so that all their works succeed and they attain emancipation,
and how is whatever they cultivate like that of the Supreme Ones?
Please expound on their pure path.
How do they forever dispel the darkness of all ignorance,
conquer Māra’s hordes and all non-Buddhist traditions,
completely wash away all defilement,
succeed in approaching the Tathāgata’s great wisdom,

444

The Flower Adornment Sutra
forever abandon all dangers and difficulties of the wretched destinies,
purify great wisdom’s extraordinarily supreme sphere of cognition,
gain the sublime path’s powers near to those of the supreme Bhagavat,
and perfect all of the meritorious qualities?
How do they realize the Tathāgata’s most supreme wisdom,
dwell in all the countless lands,
speak Dharma adapted to the minds of beings,
and engage in all the vast works of the buddhas?
How is it that they may achieve success in the wondrous paths,
expound on the Tathāgata’s treasury of right Dharma,
always be able to uphold the Dharma of the buddhas,
and do this in ways no one could exceed and no one could even equal?
How do they attain fearlessness like that of the lion
and become as pure as the full moon in all that they practice?
And how, in cultivating the Buddha’s meritorious qualities,
do they become like lotuses that do not adhere to their waters?
At that time, Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva told Vigorous Wisdom
Bodhisattva:
It is good indeed, Son of the Buddha, that, wishing to benefit the
many, wishing to bring happiness to the many, and wishing to
bestow kindly benefit on the many, with deep sympathy for the
devas and humans in the world, you have asked about the pure
practices cultivated by the bodhisattvas. Son of the Buddha, dwell­
ing in genuine Dharma, you have brought forth great vigor, pro­
gressed to irreversibility, and attained liberation. Hence your abil­
ity to ask these questions is equivalent to that of the Tathāgata.
Listen closely. Listen closely and thoroughly consider and bear
this in mind as, with the assistance of the Buddha’s awesome spiri­
tual powers, I now speak about a small number of these topics. Son of
the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva who has already aroused
the resolve to attain all-knowledge should abandon the darkness of
delusion, energetically and diligently guard this resolve, and not
allow himself to become negligent.
Son of the Buddha, it is by abiding in ten dharmas that the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva qualifies as not allowing himself to become
negligent. What are those ten? They are:
First, he guards and upholds the many moral precepts;
Second, he leaves delusion far behind and purifies the resolve to
attain bodhi;
Third, his mental dispositions are upright and straightforward
and he abandons all flattery and deviousness;

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
445
Fourth, he never retreats from his diligent cultivation of roots of
goodness;
Fifth, he constantly and thoroughly reflects on the resolve he has
made;
Sixth, he does not delight in drawing close to any foolish common
people among either laity or monastics;
Seventh, he cultivates all kinds of good works and yet does not
wish for worldly rewards;
Eighth, he forever abandons the Two Vehicles and practices the
bodhisattva path;
Ninth, he delights in cultivating the many kinds of goodness and
ensures that this never stops; and
Tenth, he constantly and skillfully contemplates his own power
of perseverance.
Son of the Buddha, if bodhisattvas practice these ten dharmas, they
then qualify as abiding in non-neglectfulness. Son of the Buddha,
the bodhisattva-mahāsattva abiding in non-neglectfulness acquires
ten kinds of purity. What are those ten? They are:
First, he practices in accordance with his own words;
Second, he perfects mindfulness and wisdom;
Third, he abides in deep meditative absorption in which he is nei­
ther sinking nor agitated;
Fourth, he delights in pursuing the Dharma of the Buddha with­
out indolence or respite;
Fifth, whichever dharma he hears, he contemplates it in accor­
dance with principle and perfects his ability to manifest skillful
and sublime wisdom;
Sixth, he enters deep dhyāna absorptions and acquires the Buddha’s
spiritual superknowledges;
Seventh, his mind abides in impartiality, free of any sense of supe­
riority or inferiority;
Eighth, his mind is unimpeded in its treatment of superior, mid­
dling, and inferior types of beings for, like the great earth, he
benefits them all equally;
Ninth, whenever he encounters any being who has even once
made the bodhi resolve, he reveres and serves him as if they
were his own upādhyāya;283 and
Tenth, whenever he is in a place where there are precept-trans­
mitting upādhyāyas or ācaryas,284 bodhisattvas, good spiritual
guides,285 or masters of the Dharma, he always brings forth rev­
erential esteem for them, serves them, and makes offerings to
them.

446

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Son of the Buddha, this is what is meant by the ten kinds of purity
of the bodhisattva who abides in non-neglectfulness. Son of the
Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva who abides in non-neglectful­
ness brings forth great vigor, gives rise to right mindfulness, pro­
duces supreme aspirations, and is unremitting in whatever he prac­
tices. His mind has no point of dependence on any dharma. He is
able to diligently cultivate the extremely profound dharmas, enter
the gateway of non-contentiousness, and increase the vastness of
his mind. He is able to accord with and completely comprehend the
boundlessly many dharmas of the Buddha and delight all tathāgatas.
Son of the Buddha, there are ten additional dharmas by which he is
able to delight all buddhas. What are those ten? They are:
First, non-retreating vigor;
Second, not being stinting even with his own body or life;
Third, not having any longing for offerings or support;
Fourth, knowing that all dharmas are like space;
Fifth, being well able to contemplate and everywhere enter the
Dharma realm;
Sixth, knowing the emblematic seals of all dharmas with a mind
that has nothing on which it depends or to which it is attached;286
Seventh, always making great vows;
Eighth, perfecting the light of purity, patience, and wisdom;
Ninth, in contemplating one’s own good dharmas, one’s mind is
free of either exaggeration or underestimation; and
Tenth, relying on the gateway of wishlessness287 in cultivating all
the pure practices.
Son of the Buddha, these are the ten dharmas in which the bod­
hisattva abides by which he is able to delight all tathāgatas. Son of
the Buddha, there are ten additional dharmas by which he is able to
delight all buddhas. What are those ten? They are:
Abiding securely in non-neglectfulness;
Abiding securely in the unproduced [dharmas] patience;
Abiding securely in great kindness;
Abiding securely in great compassion;
Abiding securely in the complete fulfillment of all the pāramitās;
Abiding securely in all the practices;
Abiding securely in the great vows;
Abiding securely in skillful expedient means;
Abiding securely in the power of courage; and
Abiding securely in that wisdom by which one contemplates all
dharmas as having no place in which they abide and as being
like space.

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
447
Son of the Buddha, if bodhisattvas dwell in these ten dharmas, they
are able to delight all buddhas. Son of the Buddha, there are ten
dharmas that enable bodhisattvas to quickly enter the grounds.
What are those ten? They are:
First, the skillful and perfect fulfillment of the two practices of
merit and wisdom;
Second, the ability to accomplish the great adornment of the path
of the pāramitās;288
Third, the possession of clear and penetrating wisdom not simply
following the statements of others;289
Fourth, serving one’s good spiritual guides290 and never abandon­
ing them;
Fifth, always practicing vigor and remaining free of indolence;
Sixth, being well able to securely dwell in the spiritual powers of
the Tathāgata;
Seventh, tireless cultivation of all roots of goodness;
Eighth, using a profound mind and sharp wisdom in adorning
oneself with the Dharma of the Great Vehicle;
Ninth, ensuring that one’s mind has no place in which it dwells
within the Dharma gateways of each successive ground;291 and
Tenth, having roots of goodness and skillful means that are of
the same essential nature as those of all buddhas of the three
periods of time.
Son of the Buddha, these ten dharmas enable bodhisattvas to
quickly enter the grounds. Furthermore, Son of the Buddha, when
bodhisattvas first dwell on the grounds, they should skillfully
engage in contemplations:
According with all their Dharma gateways;
According with all their extremely deep wisdom;
According with the causes that are cultivated;
According with the fruits that are acquired;
According with their spheres of cognition;
According with their powers and functions;
According with their manifestations;
According with their distinctions; and
According with whatever they have attained.
Having thoroughly contemplated all of these factors, they under­
stand that all dharmas are just their own mind and thus remain
free of attachment to any of them. After they have understood in
this way, when they enter the bodhisattva grounds, they are able to
become well established in them.

448

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Son of the Buddha, those bodhisattvas engage in the follow­
ing reflection: “It is only fitting that we should quickly enter the
grounds. Why? If we come to dwell in ground after ground, we
will develop such vast meritorious qualities. Once we possess such
meritorious qualities, we will gradually enter the ground of bud­
dhahood. Once we dwell on the ground of buddhahood, we will
be able to carry out the boundlessly many vast works of a buddha.
Therefore it is only appropriate that we should be forever diligent in
cultivating without rest and without weariness and then use such
great meritorious qualities to enter the bodhisattva grounds.”
Son of the Buddha, there are ten types of dharmas that enable
whatever the bodhisattvas practice to be pure. What are those ten?
They are:
First, relinquishing all possessions and wealth to fulfill beings’
wishes;
Second, upholding precepts purely without committing any
transgressions;
Third, inexhaustible gentleness and patience;
Fourth, diligently cultivating all the practices without ever retreat­
ing;
Fifth, using the power of right mindfulness to maintain a mind
free of confusion or disturbance;
Sixth, distinguishing and completely knowing all the countlessly
many dharmas;
Seventh, cultivating all the practices, yet remaining unattached
to them;
Eighth, maintaining a mind that is as unshakable as the king of
mountains;
Ninth, extensively liberating beings, serving them like a bridge;
and
Tenth, realizing that all beings are of the same single essential
nature as all tathāgatas.
Son of the Buddha, these are ten dharmas that enable the practice
of all bodhisattvas to be pure. Having thus attained purity in their
practice, they additionally acquire ten types of especially supreme
dharmas. What are those ten? They are:
First, they are regarded with protective mindfulness by all the
buddhas of other regions;
Second, their roots of goodness become especially supreme, sur­
passing those of the same class;
Third, they become well able to receive the Buddha’s empower­
ments;

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
449
Fourth, they are always able to find good people to rely upon;292
Fifth, they become securely established in vigor and never become
neglectful;
Sixth, they realize that all dharmas are the same and no different;293
Seventh, their minds constantly and securely dwell in the unsur­
passed great compassion;
Eight, they contemplate dharmas in accordance with reality and
produce marvelous wisdom;
Ninth, they are able to well cultivate skillful and marvelous expe­
dient means; and
Tenth, they are able to understand the power of the Tathāgata’s
skillful means;
Son of the Buddha, these are the ten especially supreme dharmas of
bodhisattvas. Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva has ten types of
pure vows. What are those ten? They are:
First, he vows to be tireless in ripening beings;
Second, he vows to completely practice the many types of good­
ness and purify all worlds;
Third, he vows to serve the tathāgatas and always manifest rever­
ential esteem for them;
Fourth, he vows to guard and preserve right Dharma and not be
stinting of his body or life in doing so;
Fifth, he vows to use wisdom to contemplate and enter all buddha
lands;
Sixth, he vows to be of the same single essential nature as all bod­
hisattvas;
Seventh, he vows to enter the gateways of the tathāgatas and com­
pletely comprehend all dharmas;
Eighth, he vows that all who see him will develop faith and that
none of them will not acquire benefit from it;
Ninth, he vows to use spiritual powers to remain in the world to
the end of all future kalpas; and
Tenth, he vows to fulfill the conduct of Samantabhadra and purify
the gateways to the knowledge of all modes.
Son of the Buddha, these are the bodhisattvas’ ten types of pure
vows. Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva dwells in ten kinds of
dharmas by which he enables all great vows to become completely
fulfilled. What are those ten? They are:
First, his mind is tireless;
Second, he fulfills the great adornments;
Third, he bears in mind the extraordinarily supreme vow power
of all bodhisattvas;

450

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Fourth, on hearing of the buddha lands, he vows to take rebirth
in them all;
Fifth, his deep resolve is long enduring, lasting to the end of all
future kalpas;
Sixth, he vows to bring about the complete development of all
beings;
Seventh, he does not consider remaining throughout all kalpas to
be wearisome;
Eighth, he does not even feel aversion for enduring all kinds of
suffering;
Ninth, his mind has no desire or attachment for any form of bliss;
and
Tenth, he always diligently preserves and protects the unsur­
passed gateways to the Dharma.
Son of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva fulfills vows such as
these, he immediately acquires ten kinds of inexhaustible treasur­
ies. What are those ten? They are:
The inexhaustible treasury of everywhere seeing all buddhas;
The inexhaustible treasury of complete-retention [dhāraṇīs]294 by
which he never forgets;
The inexhaustible treasury of definite and complete understand­
ing of all dharmas;
The inexhaustible treasury of great compassion to rescue and pro­
tect beings;
The inexhaustible treasury of the many different kinds of
samādhis;
The inexhaustible treasury of vast merit to satisfy the minds of
beings;
The inexhaustible treasury of extremely deep wisdom to expound
on all dharmas;
The inexhaustible treasury of spiritual superknowledges acquired
as a karmic reward;
The inexhaustible treasury of remaining for countless kalpas; and
The inexhaustible treasury of entering boundlessly many worlds.
Son of the Buddha, these are the bodhisattva’s ten inexhaustible
treasuries. After the bodhisattva acquires these ten kinds of trea­
suries, with merit that is completely fulfilled and wisdom that is
pure, he teaches the Dharma for all beings in accordance with what
is fitting for each of them.
Son of the Buddha, what is meant by teaching the Dharma for
all beings in accordance with what is fitting for each of them? This

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
451
refers to his knowing what they do, knowing their causes and con­
ditions, knowing their mental actions, knowing their mental dispo­
sitions, and then:
For those with much desire, he teaches them about unloveliness;295
For those with much hatred, he teaches them great kindness;
For those with much delusion, he teaches diligent analytic
contemplation;296
For those in whom all three poisons are equally present, he teaches
them the Dharma gateways to the development of supreme
wisdom;
For those delighting in remaining within saṃsāra, he teaches them
the three types of suffering;297
For those with attachment to any place, he teaches them the emp­
tiness and quiescence of any place;
For those with indolent minds, he teaches them great vigor;
For those who harbor conceit, he teaches them the uniform equal­
ity of dharmas;
For those with much flattery and deception, he teaches them
about the bodhisattva’s straightforwardness of character; and
For those delighting in quiescence, he provides them with exten­
sive teachings on the Dharma to enable their complete develop­
ment.
It is in these ways that the bodhisattva teaches the Dharma for
beings in accordance with what is fitting for each of them. When he
speaks Dharma for them:298
His discourse is unified in its progression, with meanings free of
contradictions or errors;
He contemplates what precedes and follows each dharma and dis­
tinguishes them with wisdom;
He investigates and determines what is right and what is wrong
and does not contradict the seals of the Dharma;299
He establishes the boundlessly many gateways of practice in accor­
dance with their orderly sequence, thereby enabling beings to
cut off their doubts;
He is skillful in discerning faculties and penetrating the teachings
of the Tathāgata;
He realizes the apex of reality and knows the equality of dharmas;
He cuts off all forms of affection for dharmas and does away with
all attachments;300
He is ever mindful of all buddhas with a mind that never relin­
quishes this for even a moment and fully understands that the
essential nature of all sounds is the same;

452

The Flower Adornment Sutra
His mind remains free of attachment to any words or speech, and
yet he is skillful in using analogies and remains free of contra­
dictions; and
He enables everyone to awaken to all buddhas’ pervasive and
impartial manifestation of their wisdom bodies in accordance
with what is fitting.
If, for the sake of all beings, the bodhisattva expounds on Dharma
in this way, then he puts it into practice himself, increases its bene­
fit, never relinquishes any of the perfections, and completely fulfills
the adornment of the path of the pāramitās.
At this time, if, for the sake of enabling the satisfaction of beings’
minds, the bodhisattva relinquishes everything, both inwardly and
outwardly, while remaining free of attachment to anything at all, he
then becomes able by this to purify the dāna pāramitā.
If he completely upholds the many moral precepts while remain­
ing free of attachment to anything at all and forever abandoning
conceit, he then becomes able by this to purify the śīla pāramitā.
If he is able to patiently endure every sort of evil while maintain­
ing a mind of equal regard for all beings and remaining as unshake­
able in this as the great earth which is able to sustain everything, he
then becomes able by this to purify the patience pāramitā.
If he everywhere initiates the many kinds of karmic works,
always cultivates relentlessly, never retreats from anything he does,
persists with courage and strength no one can restrain, neither
seizes upon nor forsakes any meritorious qualities, and in so doing
completely fulfills all the gateways of wisdom, he then becomes
able by this to purify the vigor pāramitā.
If he remains free of desire-based attachment to any of the objects
of the five types of desire, if he is able to perfect all the sequen­
tial meditative absorptions,301 if he always maintains right medita­
tive reflection and in so doing neither abides in nor emerges from
them, if he is thus able to entirely melt away all the afflictions, if he
brings forth countless samādhi gateways, if he perfects the power
of boundlessly many great spiritual superknowledges, if he is able
to enter all samādhis in both forward and reverse sequences, if he is
able while engaged in a single samādhi gateway to simultaneously
enter boundlessly many samādhi gateways, if he comprehensively
knows the spheres of experience associated with all samādhis, if he
does not contradict any of the emblematic seals of wisdom associ­
ated with any of the samādhis or samāpattis,302 and if he is able to
swiftly enter the ground of all-knowledge, he then becomes able by
this to purify the dhyāna pāramitā.

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
453
If, wherever the buddhas dwell, he hears the Dharma and
accepts and upholds it, if he draws near to the good spiritual guide,
serving him tirelessly, if he always delights in hearing the Dharma,
doing so with an insatiable mind, if pursuant to listening to it and
accepting it, he reflects upon it in accordance with its principles, if
he enters true samādhi, if he abandons all divergent views, if he
skillfully contemplates dharmas and realizes the emblematic seal of
their true character,303 if he completely knows the Tathāgata’s effort­
less path, if he avails himself of the universal gateways to wisdom,
if he enters the gateway of the wisdom of all-knowledge and attains
the state of eternal rest, he then becomes able by this to purify the
prajñā pāramitā.
If he manifests the accomplishment of karmic works in all worlds,
if he teaches beings tirelessly, if he manifests bodies in accordance
with their mental dispositions, if he remains free of defiling attach­
ment in all that he practices, if he sometimes manifests as a common
person and sometimes manifests the conduct practiced by an ārya,
if he sometimes manifests [as abiding in] saṃsāra and sometimes
manifests the appearance of entering nirvāṇa, if he is well able to
contemplate everything that is done, if he manifests all kinds of
works of adornment yet has no attachment to them, and if he every­
where enters all the destinies and liberates beings, he then becomes
able by this to purify the skillful means pāramitā.
If he completely develops all beings, if he completely adorns all
worlds, if he completely practices making offerings to all buddhas,
if he completely comprehends the dharma of nonobstruction, if he
completely cultivates the practices reaching everywhere throughout
the Dharma realm, if his bodies constantly abide even to the end of
all future kalpas, if his knowledge exhaustively knows the thoughts
in all minds, if he completely awakens to how cyclic existence either
continues on or returns to a state of cessation,304 if he manifests in
all lands, and if he completely realizes the wisdom of the Tathāgata,
he then becomes able by this to purify the vows pāramitā.
If he fulfills the power of deep resolve through remaining free
of defilements, if he fulfills the power of deep faith through making
it invincible, if he fulfills the power of great compassion through
implementing it tirelessly, if he fulfills the power of great kindness
through impartiality in everything he does, if he fulfills the power
of the complete-retention dhāraṇīs305 through being able to use skill­
ful means to retain all meanings, if he fulfills the power of eloquence
through enabling all beings to be happy and fulfilled, if he fulfills
the power of the pāramitās through adorning the Great Vehicle, if

454

The Flower Adornment Sutra
he fulfills the power of great vows through never allowing them to
be cut off, if he fulfills the power of the spiritual superknowledges
through bringing forth countless manifestations, and if he fulfills
the power of the empowerments through enabling resolute faith
and acceptance, he then becomes able by this to purify the powers
pāramitā.
If he knows those whose actions arise from desire, if he knows
those whose actions arise from hatred, if he knows those whose
actions arise from delusion, if he knows those whose actions arise
from an equal measure of all of these, if he knows those whose prac­
tices are devoted to cultivating and training the means to enter the
grounds, if he knows in but a single mind-moment the actions of
the boundlessly many beings, if he knows the minds of the bound­
lessly many beings, if he knows the reality of all dharmas, if he
knows the powers of all tathāgatas, and if he everywhere awakens to
the gateways to the Dharma realm, he then becomes able by this to
purify the knowledge pāramitā.
Son of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva purifies the pāramitās
in this way, when he perfectly fulfills the pāramitās, and when he
never relinquishes any of the pāramitās, he dwells in the greatly
adorned vehicle of the bodhisattva. Whichever beings he brings to
mind, he speaks the Dharma for them all and thus enables them to
increase their pure actions and gain liberation:
For those who have fallen into the wretched destinies, he instructs
them and enables them to arouse the resolve;
For those abiding in the difficulties,306 he enables them to become
diligently vigorous;
For beings with much desire, he reveals the dharmas for becom­
ing free of desire;
For beings with much hatred, he enables them to practice equal
regard for others;307
For beings attached to views, he teaches them about dependent
origination;
For desire realm beings, he instructs them in abandoning the evil
and unwholesome dharmas associated with desire and hatred;
For form realm beings, he discourses on vipaśyanā;308
For formless realm beings, he discourses on sublime wisdom;
For practitioners of the Two Vehicles, he teaches practices associ­
ated with quiescence; and
For those who delight in the Great Vehicle, he speaks about the
vast adornment of the ten powers.

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
455
Just as in the past, when he first aroused the resolve and saw that
countless beings had fallen into the wretched destinies, he roared
the lion’s roar and said: “I should use many different kinds of
Dharma gateways adapted to what is fitting and thereby liberate
them,” the bodhisattva becomes possessed of wisdom such as this
by which he is then able to extensively engage in the liberation of
beings.
Son of the Buddha, possessed of wisdom such as this, the bod­
hisattva prevents the lineage of the Three Jewels from ever being
cut off. How? The bodhisattva-mahāsattva does the following:
He teaches all beings to resolve to attain bodhi and therefore is
able to prevent the lineage of the buddhas from ever being cut
off;
He always reveals and explains the treasury of Dharma for beings
and therefore is able to prevent the lineage of the Dharma from
ever being cut off;
He skillfully upholds the dharmas which are taught in a manner
free of contradictions and therefore is able to prevent the lin­
eage of the Sangha from ever being cut off;
He is also able to praise all the great vows and therefore is able to
prevent the lineage of the buddhas from ever being cut off;
He distinguishes and expounds on the gateway of causes and
conditions and therefore is able to prevent the lineage of the
Dharma from ever being cut off;
He is always diligent in cultivating the six dharmas of harmony
and respect309 and therefore is able to prevent the lineage of the
Sangha from ever being cut off;
He also plants the seeds of buddhahood in the field of beings and
therefore is able to prevent the lineage of the buddhas from ever
being cut off;
He protects and sustains right Dharma, not being stinting of his
own body or life in doing so, and therefore is able to prevent the
lineage of the Dharma from ever being cut off;
He is tireless in management of the great assembly and therefore
is able to prevent the lineage of the Sangha from ever being cut
off; and
He also respectfully upholds all the Dharma and precepts pro­
claimed and instituted by the buddhas of the past, the future,
and the present, never allowing his mind to relinquish them
and therefore he is able to prevent the lineages of the Buddha,
the Dharma, and the Sangha from ever being cut off.
It is in ways such as these that the bodhisattva carries forward and
perpetuates the lineages of the Three Jewels. He remains free of

456

The Flower Adornment Sutra
error in all that he practices and dedicates everything that he does
to the gateway of all-knowledge. As a consequence, his three types
of karmic actions remain free of all flaws. Because they remain
free of all flaws, then the many sorts of good that he does, all the
practices he engages in, his teaching of beings, and his speaking
Dharma in accordance with what is fitting all remain free of even
a mind-moment’s error. They are all consistent with skillful means
and wisdom, they are all dedicated to the realization of the wisdom
of all-knowledge, and none of them are done in vain.
The bodhisattva who cultivates good dharmas in ways such as
these fulfills ten kinds of adornments in every mind-moment. What
are those ten? They are:
Physical adornment, accomplished through manifesting in ways
adapted to what is fitting for the training of beings;
Verbal adornment, accomplished through cutting off all doubts
and causing all to feel joyous delight;
Mental adornment, accomplished through entering all samādhis
in but a single mind-moment;
Adornment of buddha kṣetras, accomplished through purity in all
things and through abandoning all afflictions;
Radiant adornment; accomplished through emanating boundless
light everywhere illuminating beings;
Adornment of congregations, accomplished through everywhere
gathering in congregations, causing them all to feel joyous
delight;
Adornment with spiritual superknowledges, accomplished
through sovereign mastery in bringing forth manifestations
suited to the minds of beings;
Adornment with right teaching, accomplished through being able
to attract all intelligent people;
Adornment of the ground of nirvāṇa, accomplished through
attaining enlightenment in a single place while still also doing
so everywhere without exception throughout the ten direc­
tions; and
Adornment with skillful speech, accomplished through speaking
Dharma in a manner adapted to place, adapted to time, and
adapted to the capacity of beings’ individual faculties.
As the bodhisattva perfects adornments such as these, even in
every mind-moment of physical, verbal, and mental actions, he
does nothing in vain and dedicates everything to the gateway of
all-knowledge.

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
457
If any being merely sees this bodhisattva, one should realize
that he too has not done so in vain, for he will certainly be bound
to realize anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi. If one were to merely hear his
name, make an offering to him, reside together with him, bring him
to mind, follow him in leaving the home life, hear him teach the
Dharma, rejoice in his establishing of roots of goodness, express
admiring respect for him from a distance, or commend and praise
his name, all such circumstances result in being bound to realize
anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Son of the Buddha, just as with that medicine known as “well
when seen,”310 which, when beings merely see it, their many sorts
of poisons are all eliminated, so too it is with the bodhisattva who
perfects these dharmas, for, if beings merely see him, all the poi­
sons of their afflictions are extinguished and their good dharmas
are increased.
Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva who abides in
these dharmas and diligently increases his cultivation:
Uses the light of wisdom to destroy all the darkness of delusion;
Uses the power of kindness and compassion to utterly vanquish
the armies of Māra;
Uses the power of great wisdom and merit to restrain all non-
Buddhist traditions;
Uses his vajra meditative absorptions to destroy all mental defile­
ments and afflictions;
Uses his power of vigor to accumulate all roots of goodness;
Uses the power of his roots of goodness arising from purifying
buddha lands to leave all the wretched destinies and difficul­
ties far behind;311
Uses the power of non-attachment to purify the spheres of cogni­
tion of his knowledge;
Uses the power of skillful means and wisdom to give birth to all the
bodhisattva grounds and pāramitās as well as to the samādhis,
the six spiritual superknowledges, the three clarities, and the
four fearlessnesses, causing them all to become purified;
Uses the power of all good dharmas to completely fulfill the
complete adornment of all buddhas’ pure lands, the boundless
marks and subsidiary signs, and body, speech, and mind;
Uses the power of wisdom’s sovereign mastery in contemplation
to realize the identity of all tathāgatas’ powers, fearlessness, and
dharmas exclusive to buddhas;
Uses the power of vast wisdom to completely know the sphere of
cognition of the wisdom of all-knowledge; and

458

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Uses the power of vows made in the past to accord with those he
should teach in manifesting buddha lands, turning the wheel
of the great Dharma and liberating countlessly and boundlessly
many beings.
Son of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva who diligently
cultivates these dharmas sequentially perfects all the bodhisattva
practices even to the point of becoming one who is equal to the
buddhas. He becomes a great master of the Dharma in boundlessly
many worlds, protects and preserves right Dharma, is regarded
with protective mindfulness by all buddhas, preserves, protects,
takes on, and retains the vast treasury of Dharma, acquires unim­
peded eloquence, and deeply enters the gateways of the Dharma. In
boundlessly many worlds, within their great assemblies, he every­
where manifests his bodies in accordance with their different types,
perfectly complete in their physical marks, supreme and incompa­
rable, and uses unimpeded eloquence to skillfully explain profound
dharmas. Because his perfectly full voice is skillfully spread all
about, he is able to cause whoever hears it to enter the gateway of
inexhaustible wisdom. He knows beings’ mental actions and afflic­
tions and then speaks Dharma for them accordingly:
Because the sounds of the words he speaks are perfectly pure,
even as he expounds [the Dharma] with a single voice, he is able
to cause everyone to feel joyful;
Because his body is well-formed and possessed of great awesome
powers, as he abides within the congregation, there is no one at
all who is able to surpass him;
Because he knows well the minds of beings, he is able to manifest
bodies everywhere for them;
Because he teaches the Dharma skillfully, his voice is unob­
structed;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery of mind, in skillfully
teaching the great Dharma, no one is able to impede him;
Because he has attained the fearlessnesses, his mind is free of all
timidity;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery of the Dharma, no one
is able to surpass him;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery of knowledge, no one
is able to overcome him;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery in the prajñā-pāramitā,
there are no contradictions in the marks of dharmas about
which he speaks;

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
459
Because he has attained sovereign mastery in eloquence, as he
speaks the Dharma in accordance with others’ dispositions, his
discourse is continuous and uninterrupted;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery in dhāraṇīs, he is defin­
itive in revealing the true character of dharmas;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery in eloquence, what­
ever he is expounding upon, he is able to open many different
gateways through the use of analogies;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery in great compassion,
he diligently instructs beings with unrelenting resolve;
Because he has attained sovereign mastery in great kindness, he
emanates a web of light that pleases the minds of everyone in
the assembly.
When the bodhisattva sitting on the high and wide lion’s throne
expounds on the great Dharma in this way, aside from the Tathāgata
or other great bodhisattvas possessed of supreme vows and wis­
dom, there are no other beings able to be superior to him in this.
No one is even able to view the very summit of his crown or out­
shine him with their radiance. If someone wished to use challeng­
ing questions to cause him to bend in submission, this would be an
utter impossibility.
Son of the Buddha, after the bodhisattva-mahāsattva acquires
powers of sovereign mastery such as these, even if there were an
ineffable number of worlds with vast bodhimaṇḍas full of beings and
every one of those beings was possessed of the awesome virtue
and physical marks of the lord of the great trichiliocosm, when this
bodhisattva manifested his body, he would still be able to outshine
even a great assembly such as this.
With great kindness and compassion he comforts those who are
fearful and timid. With deep wisdom, he assesses their inclinations.
Because he teaches the Dharma for them with fearless eloquence, he
is able cause everyone to feel joyful. Why is this? Son of the Buddha:
This is because the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has perfected the
sphere of incalculably great wisdom;
Because he has perfected the ability to make countless skillful dis­
tinctions;
Because he has perfected vast powers of right mindfulness;
Because he has perfected inexhaustible skillful wisdom;
Because he has perfected the dhāraṇī by which one reaches a deci­
sive and complete understanding of the true character of all
dharmas;
Because he has perfected the boundless resolve to attain bodhi;

460

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Because he has perfected marvelous eloquence entirely free of
error;
Because he has perfected the deep resolute faith by which one
receives the empowerment of all buddhas;
Because he has perfected the power of wisdom by which one
everywhere enters the congregations of all buddhas of the three
periods of time;
Because he has perfected the pure mind that knows that all bud­
dhas of the three periods of time are of the same essential
nature; and
Because he has perfected the wisdom of all tathāgatas of the three
times as well as the great vows and wisdom of all bodhisattvas
by which he is able to serve as a great master of the Dharma
who reveals and elucidates the right Dharma treasury of all
buddhas while also protecting and preserving it.
At that time, wishing to restate his meaning, assisted by the spiri­
tual power of the Buddha, Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva then spoke
these verses:
His mind dwells in bodhi and gathers manifold merit,
he is never neglectful and plants solid wisdom,
and he is rightly mindful of his resolve and never forgets it.
All buddhas of the ten directions rejoice in this.
He diligently exhorts himself with solid mindfulness and zeal,
has nothing in the world he depends on, never timidly retreats,
and, through non-contentiousness, enters the profound dharmas.
All buddhas of the ten directions rejoice in this.
After the buddhas’ rejoice, he strengthens his vigor,
cultivates merit and wisdom and the dharmas assisting the path,
enters the grounds, purifies the many practices,
and fulfills the vows spoken of by the Tathāgata.
Cultivating in this way, he acquires the sublime Dharma.
Having acquired the Dharma, he then bestows it on the many beings.
Adapting to their mental dispositions, their faculties, and natures,
he accords with what is fitting as he expounds on it for them all.
As the bodhisattva discourses on Dharma for them,
he does not relinquish his own practice of the perfections.
Once the path of the pāramitās has been accomplished,
he forever rescues all beings from the ocean of the realms of existence.
Day and night, he is diligent in cultivation and free of indolence
as he prevents the lineages of the Three Jewels from ever being cut off.
All the dharmas of pristine purity that he practices
are all dedicated to reaching the ground of the Tathāgata.

Chapter 18 — Clarifying the Dharma
461
All the many good practices the bodhisattva cultivates
are all done for the purpose of ripening the many sorts of beings
and to enable them to dispel darkness, destroy afflictions,
conquer the armies of the māras, and realize right enlightenment.
Cultivating in this manner, he acquires the wisdom of the Buddha,
deeply enters the right Dharma treasury of the Tathāgata,
and becomes a great Dharma master, expounding on sublime Dharma,
like a rain of the elixir of immortality bestowing its moisture on all.
His kindness, compassion, and deep sympathy extend to everyone.
Of beings’ thoughts and actions, there are none he does not know.
He provides explanations for them, suited to their dispositions,
of all the countlessly and boundlessly many dharmas of the Buddha.
Going and stopping, he is as calm and unhurried as the elephant king
while also being as courageous and fearless as a lion.
He is as unshakeable as a mountain, possesses wisdom like an ocean,
and is also like the great rains in dispelling the heat of the multitude.
At that time, after Dharma Wisdom Bodhisattva had spoken these
verses, the Tathāgata was delighted and that great assembly upheld
these teachings in practice.
The End of Chapter Eighteen

462

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 19
Ascent to the Suyāma Heaven Palace
At that time, through the awe-inspiring spiritual powers of the
Tathāgata, in all the worlds of the ten directions, in their four-conti­
nent lands, on their continent of Jambudvīpa, and also on the summit
of their Mount Sumeru, everyone saw the Tathāgata abiding in the
midst of a congregation in which, with the assistance of the Buddha’s
spiritual powers, all those bodhisattvas expounded on the Dharma.
There was no one there not under the impression that he was always
in the direct presence of the Buddha.
At that time, even without departing from any of those bodhi trees
or the summits of those Mount Sumerus, the Bhagavat then proceeded
toward the Hall of Jewel Adornments of the Suyāma Heaven Palace.
At that time, the Suyāma Heaven king saw the Buddha coming in
the distance and immediately used his spiritual powers to transfor­
mationally create a jeweled lotus flower dais lion throne within the
palace.
It was adorned with a hundred myriad tiers of adornments, cov­
ered over from above by a hundred myriad interspersed gold nets, a
hundred myriad flower curtains, a hundred myriad garland curtains,
a hundred myriad incense curtains, and a hundred myriad jewel cur­
tains. It was also encircled by arrays of flower canopies, garland cano­
pies, incense canopies, and jewel canopies, each of them numbering a
hundred myriads, and it was illuminated by the dazzling radiance of
a hundred myriad light rays.
A hundred myriad Suyāma Heaven kings bowed down in rever­
ence, a hundred myriad Brahma Heaven kings danced for joy, a hun­
dred myriad bodhisattvas proclaimed praises, and a hundred myriad
types of celestial music continuously played a hundred myriad kinds
of Dharma sounds without interruption.
A hundred myriad kinds of flower clouds, a hundred myriad kinds
of garland clouds, a hundred myriad kinds of adornment clouds, and
a hundred myriad kinds of robe clouds surrounded and covered the
scene and the light from a hundred myriad kinds of maṇi jewel clouds
created dazzling illumination.

464

The Flower Adornment Sutra
[This throne] was born of a hundred myriad kinds of roots of good­
ness, was protected and supported by a hundred myriad buddhas,
was enhanced by a hundred myriad kinds of merit, was adorned by a
hundred myriad kinds of deep resolve and a hundred myriad kinds
of vows, was produced by a hundred myriad kinds of practices, was
established by a hundred myriad kinds of dharmas, and was trans­
formationally manifested by a hundred myriad kinds of spiritual
powers. It constantly emanated a hundred myriad kinds of voices
explaining all dharmas.
At that time, after that deva king had prepared the throne, he bent
down his body before the Buddha and, placing his palms together,
reverently and solemnly addressed the Buddha, saying, “Welcome,
O Bhagavat. Welcome, Well Gone One. Welcome, Tathāgata. We only
pray that the One Worthy of Offerings, the One of Right and Universal
Enlightenment, will take pity on us and stay in this palace.”
The Buddha then accepted the invitation and ascended into the
Jeweled Hall, while also doing so in all those same circumstances
throughout the ten directions.
Then the [Suyāma] Heaven king recalled the roots of goodness he
had planted in the presence of past buddhas, whereupon, assisted by
the Buddha’s spiritual powers, he spoke these verses:
Famous Name Tathāgata, renowned throughout the ten directions
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this very hall of maṇi jewels.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Jewel King Tathāgata, the lamp of the world
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of purity.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Joyous Eyes Tathāgata, one with unimpeded vision
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of adornments.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Burning Lamp Tathāgata, one who illuminates the world
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of extraordinarily supremacy.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Beneficence Tathāgata, benefactor of the world
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of immaculate purity.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.

Chapter 19 — Ascent to the Suyāma Heaven Palace
465
Well Enlightened Tathāgata, one who had no teacher
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of precious fragrances.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Celestial Supremacy Tathāgata, the lamp within the world
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of wondrous fragrance.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Never Departing Tathāgata, the hero of discourses
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of the universal eye.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Unexcelled Tathāgata, one replete in the many virtues
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of fine adornments.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Austere Practices Tathāgata, benefactor of the world
and the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
has previously entered this hall of universal adornments.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Just as the Suyāma Heaven king in this world, assisted by the Buddha’s
spiritual powers, recalled the meritorious qualities of buddhas of the
past and proclaimed their praises, so too did the Suyāma Heaven
kings throughout the worlds of the ten directions all also praise the
meritorious qualities of the buddhas in this same way.
At that time, when the Bhagavat entered the Hall of Maṇi Jewel
Adornments and sat down in the lotus posture on that jeweled lotus
flower dais lion throne, this hall suddenly became just as vast as the
dwelling space of that entire celestial congregation. So too did this
occur in the same way in all those other places throughout the worlds
of the ten directions.
The End of Chapter Nineteen

466

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 20
Praise Verses in the Suyāma Heaven Palace
At that time, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from worlds
beyond lands as numerous as the atoms in ten myriads of buddha
kṣetras, there came from within the worlds in each of the ten direc­
tions a great bodhisattva, each attended by bodhisattvas as numer­
ous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra, all of whom came and gathered
together there.
Their names were Forest of Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva,
Forest of Wisdom Bodhisattva, Forest of Supremacy Bodhisattva,
Forest of Fearlessness Bodhisattva, Forest of a Sense of Shame and
Dread of Blame Bodhisattva, Forest of Vigor Bodhisattva, Forest
of Powers Bodhisattva, Forest of Practices Bodhisattva, Forest of
Enlightenment Bodhisattva, and Forest of Knowledge Bodhisattva.
The lands from which these bodhisattvas came were Familial
Wisdom World, Banner Wisdom World, Jeweled Wisdom World,
Supreme Wisdom World, Lamp-like Wisdom World, Vajra Wisdom
World, Blissful Wisdom World, Solar Wisdom World, Pure Wisdom
World, and Brahman Wisdom World.
Each of these bodhisattvas had purely cultivated the brahman con­
duct in the presence of buddhas. They were Eternally Dwelling Eye
Buddha, Invincible Eye Buddha, Non-abiding Eye Buddha, Unmoving
Eye Buddha, Heavenly Eye Buddha, Liberation Eye Buddha, Truth-
Examining Eye Buddha, Understanding Signs Eye Buddha, Supreme
Eye Buddha, and Blue Eye Buddha.
After these bodhisattvas had arrived in the presence of the
Buddha, they bowed down their heads in reverence at the Buddha’s
feet and then each transformationally created a maṇi jewel dais lion
throne off in the respective direction from which he had come and sat
down on it in the lotus posture. And just as those bodhisattvas came
and gathered in the Suyāma Heaven in this world, so too did they do
so in all those other worlds as well. All the names of those bodhisat­
tvas, the names of their worlds, and the names of their tathāgatas were
all identical and no different.
Then, the Bhagavat emanated from the top of his two feet a hun­
dred thousand koṭīs of marvelously colored light rays which, in all

468

The Flower Adornment Sutra
those worlds of the ten directions, everywhere illuminated the bud­
dhas together with their great assemblies within the Suyāma Heaven
Palaces, doing so in such a way that none of them failed to fully
appear.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the
Buddha, Forest of Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva surveyed the
ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The Buddha has emanated great rays of light
everywhere illuminating the ten directions.
Everyone sees the one most revered among devas and men
with penetrating and unimpeded vision.
The Buddha sits here in the Suyāma Heaven Palace
even as he is present everywhere in the worlds of the ten directions.
This circumstance is of the most extraordinary sort,
rarely ever encountered in the world.
The Suyāma Heaven king
has uttered verses in praise of ten tathāgatas.
Just as this was seen here in this assembly,
so too was it just so in all those other places as well.
All of those other assembled bodhisattvas
share the same identical names as ours
and also proclaim the unexcelled Dharma
in all places throughout the ten directions.
The worlds from which they come
have names that also are no different.
Each of them has purely cultivated the brahman conduct
in those places where their buddhas dwell.
The names of all those tathāgatas
are all also just the same.
Their lands are all bounteous and happy
and they all possess sovereign mastery of the spiritual powers.
In all those places throughout the ten directions,
they all say, “The Buddha is dwelling here.”
Some see him dwelling among the people
and some see him dwelling in a heavenly palace.
The Tathāgata is dwelling peacefully everywhere
throughout all lands
even as we now see the Buddha
dwelling here in this heavenly palace.
In the past, he made the vow to attain bodhi
which extended to all worlds of the ten directions.

Chapter 20 — Praise Verses in the Suyāma Heaven Palace
469
Therefore the Buddha’s awesome power
is inconceivable in its complete pervasiveness.
He has left the desires of those in the world far behind
and has completely fulfilled boundless virtues.
He has therefore acquired powers of the spiritual superknowledges
that no beings fail to see.
He roams to the worlds throughout the ten directions,
like space, utterly unimpeded.
Whether in a single body or countless bodies,
his signs are inapprehensible.
The meritorious qualities of the Buddha are boundless.
How could one even fathom them?
He neither stays nor goes,
and yet he everywhere enters the Dharma realm.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Wisdom Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then
spoke these verses:
The great guide of the world,
the unexcelled Bhagavat who has abandoned the defilements,
is one rarely encountered
even in an inconceivable number of kalpas.
The Buddha emanates great radiance
which no one in the world does not see.
He extensively expounds for the sake of the multitude
and thus benefits the many kinds of beings.
The Tathāgata comes forth into the world
to dispel the darkness of ignorance for the sake of the world.
A lamp for the world such as this
is rare and difficult to ever be able to behold.
He has already cultivated giving, moral virtue, patience,
vigor, and the dhyāna absorptions
as well as the prajñā-pāramitā,
and uses these to illuminate the world.
The Tathāgata has no peer.
If one sought his match, no one such as he could ever be found.
Without comprehending the reality with regard to dharmas,
no one would be able to see him.
The bodies and spiritual superknowledges of the Buddha
have such sovereign mastery, they are inconceivable.
He neither goes nor comes,
and yet he teaches the Dharma and liberates beings.

470

The Flower Adornment Sutra
If there be anyone who is able to see or hear
the pure teacher of gods and men,
he shall forever escape the wretched destinies
and leave behind all sufferings.
For measureless and numberless kalpas,
he cultivated the practices leading to bodhi.
Whoever is unable to know the meaning of this
remains unable to realize buddhahood.
Though someone might have made offerings to countless buddhas
throughout an inconceivable number of kalpas,
if one were instead to know the meaning of this,
the merit thereby acquired would then exceed even that.
Though one might have bestowed upon buddhas
precious jewels enough to fill up countless kṣetras,
if one were still unable to know the meaning of this,
one could still never succeed in realizing bodhi.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Supremacy Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and
then spoke these verses:
It is just as when, in the first month of summer,
in a clear and cloudless sky,
the brilliant sunlight’s shining
has none of the ten directions it does not fill.
His radiance is so beyond measure
that there is no one who could fathom it.
If this would be true even for those who have eyes,
how much the more so it would be for those who are blind.
So too it is with the buddhas
whose meritorious qualities are so boundless that,
even if they tried for inconceivably many kalpas,
no one could ever discern and know them all.
All dharmas have no place from which they come
and also have no one who could create them.
They have nothing from which they are born
and they cannot be discriminated.
All dharmas have no coming forth.
Therefore there is nothing that is produced.
Because their production has no existence,
their extinction cannot be apprehended either.
All dharmas are unproduced
and also are not extinguished.

Chapter 20 — Praise Verses in the Suyāma Heaven Palace
471
If one is able to understand them in this manner,
this person is one who sees the Tathāgata.
Because all dharmas are unproduced,
they have no inherently existent nature.
If one distinguishes and knows them in this way,
this person has a penetrating comprehension of the deep meaning.
Because dharmas have no nature at all,
there is no one who is able to completely know them.
If one understands dharmas in this manner,
then there is ultimately nothing at all which is understood.
That which is said to be produced
is that by which all lands appear to exist.
If one is able to comprehend the nature of those lands,
then one’s mind will not be subject to confusion or delusion.
One contemplates in accordance with reality
the nature of the world and all of its lands.
If one is able to know this,
then one can skillfully explain the meaning of all things.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Fearlessness Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and
then spoke these verses:
The vast body of the Tathāgata
reaches to the very end of the Dharma realm.
Without even leaving this throne,
he still pervades all places.
If on hearing Dharma such as this,
one feels reverence and resolute faith,
one will forever escape the three wretched destinies
and all the other sufferings and difficulties.
Even if one were to travel
to all the countless and innumerable worlds,
single-mindedly wishing to hear
of the Tathāgata’s sovereign powers,
because such dharmas of the buddhas as these
constitute the unexcelled bodhi,
even if one wished to hear of them for but a moment,
there is no one who could succeed in this.
Wherever there were those who in the past
had faith in dharmas of the Buddha such as these,
they already become one of the most revered of two-legged beings
and then became lamps for the world.

472

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Wherever there are those who in the future will hear
of the sovereign powers of the Tathāgata,
and having heard of them will then be able to have faith in them,
they too will be bound to realize buddhahood.
Wherever there are any in the present
who are able to have faith in this Dharma of the Buddha,
they too are bound to realize right enlightenment
and then expound the Dharma fearlessly.
This Dharma is extremely difficult to encounter
even in countless and numberless kalpas.
If there any who are able to obtain a hearing of it,
one should realize this is due to the power of their original vows.
If there is someone who is able to accept and uphold
dharmas of all buddhas such as these and then,
having upheld them, can then extensively proclaim and explain them,
this person is bound to realize buddhahood.
How much the more so is this true of one who is diligently vigorous
and who never relinquishes his steadfast resolve.
One should realize that a person such as this
is definitely bound to realize bodhi.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of a Sense of Shame and Dread of Blame Bodhisattva surveyed
the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
If someone succeeds in hearing this
rare dharma of sovereign mastery
and is then able to arouse thoughts of joyous delight,
he will swiftly do away with the net of doubts and delusions.
He who is possessed of all knowledge and vision
uttered such words himself.
There is nothing not known by the Tathāgata.
He is therefore inconceivable.
There is no one who, from a state of no wisdom,
could then simply bring forth wisdom.
Those in the world are forever immersed in darkness.
Therefore there is no one able to produce it.
Just as form and non-form
are twofold and thus are not one,
so too it is with wisdom and non-wisdom,
for their substance in each case is different.
Just as what has signs and what is signless
as well as saṃsāra and nirvāṇa

Chapter 20 — Praise Verses in the Suyāma Heaven Palace
473
when distinguished, are each different,
so too it is with wisdom and the absence of wisdom.
Just as it is with worlds which, when first being established,
have no signs of their destruction,
so too it is with wisdom and the absence of wisdom,
for those two characteristics are not both present at one time.
Just as, when the bodhisattva first arouses the resolve,
he is not just then possessed of the mind he acquires only later,
so too it is with wisdom and the absence of wisdom,
for those two states of mind do not occur at the same time.
Just as in the body possessed of its consciousnesses,
there is no joining of any one of them with any other,
so too it is with wisdom and the absence of wisdom,
for they ultimately have no circumstance in which they unite.
Just as the medicine known as agada
is able to destroy every sort of poison,
so too it is with wisdom
which is able to extinguish the absence of wisdom.
The Tathāgata is one who is unexcelled
and is also one who has no peer.
No one can even compare to him.
He is therefore but rarely encountered.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Vigor Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then
spoke these verses:
All dharmas have no distinctions
and there is no one able to know them.
Only a buddha and another buddha would understand this
because their wisdom is ultimate.
This is just as with gold and the color of gold
for which it is their nature to be indistinguishable.
So too it is with the Dharma and non-Dharma
which, in their essential nature, have no difference.
Beings and non-beings
are both devoid of any reality.
The nature of dharmas such as these is that
the reality of them both is non-existent.
Just as it is so of the future
that it has none of the signs of the past,
so too it is with all dharmas
which are themselves devoid of any signs at all.

474

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Just as it is with the marks of production and extinction
that in all their varieties are unreal,
so too it is with all dharmas
in which an inherent nature does not exist at all.
Though nirvāṇa cannot be seized upon,
when spoken of, it is of two kinds.
So too it is with all dharmas,
for it is through discriminations that differences exist.
Just as it is in reliance on those things which are counted
that there exists that which is able to keep their count.312
Their respective natures are entirely nonexistent.
Just so does one completely understand dharmas.
This is analogous to the method of counting
that increases from one to the measureless.
The method of counting is devoid of any essential nature.
It is by resort to intelligence that such distinctions are made.
Just as it is with all worlds
that, with the burning of the kalpa, they come to an end,
yet empty space remains unruined,
so too it is with the wisdom of the Buddha.
Just as the beings throughout the ten directions
each seize on signs in what is but empty space,
So too it is that, in regard to the Buddha,
those in the world make false discriminations.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Powers Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then
spoke these verses:
All realms of beings
dwell within the three periods of time,
and all beings of the three periods of time
dwell within the five aggregates.
For the aggregates, it is karmic actions that are their root.
For karmic actions, it is the mind that is their root.
Mind dharmas are like mere conjurations.
So too it is with the world.
The world is not self-created
nor is it created by something other.
Nonetheless it succeeds in having a creation
and also succeeds in having a destruction.
Although the world has a creation
and although the world has a destruction,

Chapter 20 — Praise Verses in the Suyāma Heaven Palace
475
for those with a complete comprehension of the world,
these two should not even be mentioned.
What is it that constitutes the world?
And what is it that is not the world?
What is the world and what is not the world
are merely distinctions in name.
It is the dharmas of the three times and the five aggregates
that are said to constitute the world.
Their extinction is what is not the world.
Matters such as these are merely artificial designations.
How is it that one speaks of the aggregates?
What nature do the aggregates possess?
The nature of the aggregates cannot be extinguished.
Therefore one speaks of their being unproduced.
When distinguishing these aggregates,
their nature is found to be empty and quiescent.
Because they are empty, they cannot be destroyed.
This is the meaning of being unproduced.
Since beings are like this,
all buddhas are also just this same way.
The buddhas and the dharmas of all buddhas—
they are devoid of any inherently existent nature.
If there be anyone who is able to know these dharmas
in a way that accords with reality and is free of inverted views,
then the person possessed of all knowledge and vision
will always be seen directly before him.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Practices Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then
spoke these verses:
Just as elemental earth
as it exists in all worlds of the ten directions
is entirely devoid of any inherently existent nature,
and yet there is no place that it is not pervasively present,
so too it is with the body of the Buddha
which everywhere pervades all worlds.
All its many different forms and characteristics
have no subjective agent and no place from which they come.
It is only on the basis of karmic actions
that one speaks of the existence of any being.
And it is also not apart from beings
that there is any karmic action at all that can be found.

476

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The nature of karmic actions is fundamentally empty and quiescent.
yet they are that upon which beings depend.
They everywhere create the many forms and characteristics
which themselves also have no place from which they come.
All such forms and characteristics as these
arise from the inconceivable power of karma.
If one completely comprehends their root,
then one has nothing at all that one sees within them.
So too it is with the body of the Buddha,
for that is inconceivable.
All of its many different forms and characteristics
appear throughout the kṣetras of the ten directions.
The body itself is not the Buddha.
The Buddha himself is not the body.
It is only the Dharma which constitutes his body
and which completely comprehends all dharmas.
If one is able to see the body of the Buddha
as pure and like the nature of dharmas,
this person will become free of all doubts and delusions
with respect to the Dharma of the Buddha.
If one sees all dharmas
as having an original nature like nirvāṇa,
this then is to see the Tathāgata
as ultimately having no place in which he dwells.
If one cultivates right mindfulness
and sees with complete clarity the Rightly Enlightened One
as signless and without any basis for discriminations,
this one qualifies as a son of the Dharma King.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Enlightenment Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and
then spoke these verses:
It is analogous to a master painter313
who is spreading forth his colors
as he falsely seizes on differentiating signs
even though the great elements have no such distinctions.
The great elements themselves have no such coloration
and within those colors, there are none of the great elements.
Still, it is not apart from the great elements
that there are then these colors which can be found.
There are no colored paintings in the mind,
nor is there any mind within a colored painting.

Chapter 20 — Praise Verses in the Suyāma Heaven Palace
477
Still, it is not apart from the mind,
that there is then a colored painting which can be found.
That mind never stops [creating its paintings]
which are so countless as to be inconceivable.
They manifest all colors,
and yet they each remain unaware of the others.
Just as a master painter
is unable to know his own mind,
yet paints because of the mind,
so too, the nature of all dharmas is just like this.
The mind is like a master painter
who is able to paint all worlds.
All of the five aggregates arise from it
and there is no dharma it does not create.
Just as it is with the mind, so too it is with the Buddha.
Just as it is with the Buddha, so too it is with beings.
One should realize that the Buddha and the mind
both have an essential nature that is endless.
If a person knows that it is the actions of the mind
that everywhere create all worlds,
then this person thereby sees the Buddha
and completely understands the Buddha’s true nature.
The mind does not abide in the body,
nor does the body abide in the mind,
and yet they are able to do the Buddha’s works
with unprecedented sovereign mastery.
If one wishes to completely know
all buddhas of the three periods of time,
then he should contemplate the nature of the Dharma realm
as being entirely created by the mind alone.
At that time, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
Forest of Knowledge Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and
then spoke these verses:
That which one grasps is ungraspable.
That which one sees is invisible.
That which one hears cannot be heard.
The one mind is inconceivable.
The measurable and the immeasurable
are both ungraspable.
If there is anyone who wishes to grasp them,
they will ultimately have nothing they apprehend.

478

The Flower Adornment Sutra
When what one should not speak of, one nonetheless speaks of,
this amounts to deceiving oneself.
When one has not completed one’s own work,
one fails to cause the multitudes to be happy.
If one wished to praise the Tathāgata’s
boundless body of wondrous form,
even exhausting countless kalpas in doing so,
no one would be able to completely describe it.
Just as a wish-fulfilling jewel
is able to manifest all forms,
manifesting forms from what is formless,
so too it is with all the buddhas.
This is also analogous to pure empty space
which is formless and invisible.
Although it manifests all forms,
there is still no one able to see empty space itself.
So too it is with all the buddhas
who everywhere manifest countless forms.
This is not a place where thought can function
and it is something that no one can see.
Although one hears the voice of the Tathāgata,
that voice is not the Tathāgata.
Still, it is not apart from that voice
that one can know the One of Right and Perfect Enlightenment.
Bodhi has no coming or going.
It goes beyond all discriminations.
How then could one claim of oneself
that he is able to succeed in seeing it?
The buddhas have no dharmas at all.
What then could the Buddha speak of?
It is only in accordance with one’s own mind
that one supposes he speaks dharmas such as these.
The End of Chapter Twenty

Chapter 21
The Ten Practices
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, Forest
of Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva entered “the bodhisattva’s skill­
ful reflection samādhi.” Having entered this samādhi, from beyond
a number of worlds off in each of the ten directions as numerous
as the atoms in a myriad buddha kṣetras, buddhas as numerous as
the atoms in a myriad buddha kṣetras, all identically named Forest of
Meritorious Qualities, all manifested before him and said to Forest of
Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva:
It is good indeed, Son of Good Family, that you have been able to
enter this skillful reflection samādhi. Son of Good Family, that you
have been able to do this is because these identically-named bud­
dhas from each of the ten directions as numerous as the atoms in a
myriad buddha kṣetras have all joined in assisting you.
It is also due to the power of Vairocana Tathāgata’s past vows
and his awesome spiritual powers as well as due to the power of all
bodhisattvas’ roots of goodness that you have been enabled to enter
this samādhi and expound on the Dharma:
To increase the understanding of the Buddha’s wisdom;
To bring about deep entry into the Dharma realm;
To bring about complete understanding of the realms of beings;
To ensure that whatever is entered, that entry is unimpeded;
To ensure that whatever is practiced, it is free of obstacles;
To assist the attainment of countless skillful means;
To embrace the nature of all-knowledge;
To awaken to all dharmas;
To know all faculties; and
To enable the retention and explanation of all dharmas.
That is to say, it is to enable the taking up of the ten practices of all
bodhisattvas. Son of Good Family, you should accept the assistance
of the buddhas’ awesome spiritual powers and expound on these
dharmas.
At this time, the buddhas immediately bestowed on Forest of
Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva unimpeded wisdom, unattached
wisdom, uninterrupted wisdom, teacherless wisdom, undeluded

480

The Flower Adornment Sutra
wisdom, invariable wisdom, unfailing wisdom, measureless wis­
dom, insuperable wisdom, unremitting wisdom, and indomitable
wisdom. Why? It is because the dharma of this samādhi’s power is
of this very sort.
At this time, each of the buddhas extended his right hand and
touched the crown of the head of Forest of Meritorious Qualities
Bodhisattva. Forest of Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva then arose
from meditative absorption and told the bodhisattvas:
The bodhisattva’s practices are inconceivable, commensurate with
the Dharma realm and the realm of empty space. Why? This is
because the bodhisattva-mahāsattva cultivates by training in accor­
dance with [the practices of] all buddhas of the three periods of
time.314
Sons of the Buddha, what then are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
practices? Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has ten
kinds of practices proclaimed by all buddhas of the three periods of
time. What are those ten? They are as follows:
First, joyful practice;
Second, beneficial practice;
Third, non-opposing practice;
Fourth, indomitable practice;
Fifth, unconfused practice;
Sixth, well-manifested practice;
Seventh, unattached practice;
Eighth, difficult-to-attain practice;
Ninth, the practice of good dharmas; and
Tenth, genuine practice.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, what all is meant by the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s “joyful practice”? Sons of the Buddha,
this bodhisattva is a great benefactor. He is able to give with kind­
ness everything he possesses, doing so with an impartial mind free
of regret or miserliness, not longing for any reward, not seeking any
fame, and not desiring to gain any benefit or support. He does this
only:
To rescue and protect all beings, attract and sustain all beings, and
benefit all beings;
To train in practices originally cultivated by all buddhas;
To bear in mind practices originally cultivated by all buddhas;
To delight in practices originally cultivated by all buddhas;
To purify practices originally cultivated by all buddhas;

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
481
To increase practices originally cultivated by all buddhas;
To preserve practices originally cultivated by all buddhas;
To reveal practices originally cultivated by all buddhas;
To expound on practices originally cultivated by all buddhas; and
To enable beings to part from suffering and attain happiness.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva cultivates
these practices, he causes all beings to feel joy and delight. Wherever
there are regions and lands with places beset by poverty and pri­
vation, by the power of his vows, he goes and takes rebirth there
as one of noble birth and immense wealth who possesses endless
valuables and jewels and who, even if, in every mind-moment, there
were countlessly and innumerably many beings who came to see
him, each one addressing him by saying: “O Worthy One, we are
poverty-stricken, bereft of any means of support, hungry, emaci­
ated, subject to intensely difficult sufferings, with lives on the verge
of unsustainability. I only wish that you would feel kindly pity and
give me the flesh of your body, allowing me to eat it in order to con­
tinue this life,” that bodhisattva would then be immediately willing
to give it to him to delight and satisfy him.
Even if there continued to be countless hundreds of thousands
of beings who came and begged from him in this way, the bodhisat­
tva would never retreat in fear. Rather, he would only respond with
a mind of even greater kindness and compassion. Because these
beings all came and sought alms from him, when the bodhisattva
saw this, he would feel redoubled happiness and would think: “I
have encountered such a fine benefit here, for these beings are my
fields for the planting of merit. These are my fine friends who, even
without being sought out or invited, have come forth to instruct me
in entering the Buddha’s Dharma. I should now cultivate and train
accordingly and refrain from opposing the will of these beings.” He
would also think:
May all the roots of goodness arising from what I have done in the
past, do now, and do in the future enable me to receive immense
bodies in the future in all worlds and among all beings, the flesh
from which can go to satisfy all beings suffering from hunger,
even to the point that I continue not to die so long as there is still
even a single small being who has not yet eaten his fill, so that
flesh can thus be cut from my bodies endlessly. May these roots of
goodness lead to my attainment of anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi and
to my realization of the great nirvāṇa.
May it also be that all those beings who eat my flesh will also
attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi, attain impartial wisdom, become

482

The Flower Adornment Sutra
equipped with all dharmas of the Buddha, extensively engage in
the Buddha’s works, and so forth, up until they enter the nirvāṇa
without residue.
May it also be that, so long as there is still even a single being
whose mind has not become satisfied, I will continue to refrain
from final realization of anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva benefits beings and yet has no
perception of a self, of a being, of an existence, of a life, of a compos­
ite being,315 of a pudgala, of a “person,” of a māṇavaka,316 of a subjec­
tive agent of actions, or of anyone who undergoes experiences.
He simply contemplates the boundlessly many dharmas of
the Dharma realm and the realm of beings as empty dharmas, as
dharmas in which nothing exists, as signless dharmas, as dharmas
devoid of any substantiality, as dharmas having no place in which
they abide, as dharmas having nothing on which they depend, and
as dharmas having no function.
When he engages in this contemplation, he does not perceive
the existence of his own person, does not perceive the existence of
anything bestowed as a gift, does not perceive the existence of any­
one who is its recipient, does not perceive the existence of a field of
merit, does not perceive the existence of any karmic action, does not
perceive the existence of any karmic consequences, does not per­
ceive the existence of any karmic fruits, does not perceive the exis­
tence of any major karmic fruits, and does not perceive the existence
of any minor karmic fruits.
At that time, the bodhisattva contemplates the bodies received
by all beings of the past, the future, and the present as following
a rapid course to deterioration and destruction whereupon he has
this thought:
How very strange these beings are! They are so deluded and
ignorant. During the course of saṃsāra, they receive countlessly
many bodies which are all so fragile and which all ceaselessly
and rapidly return to deterioration and destruction. Whether
already deteriorated and destroyed, now deteriorating and being
destroyed, or bound to deteriorate and be destroyed in the future,
they remain unable to use those non-enduring bodies in the quest
to obtain a steadfastly enduring body.
I should exhaustively train in what the buddhas have trained
in to realize all-knowledge and know all dharmas. Then, for the
sake of all beings, I may teach them the identity of the three peri­
ods of time, accordance with quiescence, and the indestructible
nature of dharmas, thereby enabling them to forever attain secu­
rity and happiness.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
483
Sons of the Buddha, this is what is meant by the first of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s practices, the joyful practice.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “beneficial practice”? This bodhisattva guards and
upholds the pure moral precepts and his mind has no attachment
to forms, sounds, smells, tastes, or touchables. He also proclaims
this as a teaching for beings.
He does not seek any sort of power and influence, does not seek
to become of any particular caste, does not seek to acquire wealth,
does not seek to acquire a particular physical appearance, and does
not seek to become king. In all such circumstances, he remains free
of any attachments and simply firmly upholds the pure moral pre­
cepts, thinking in this way: “In my observance of the pure moral
precepts, it is essential that I should relinquish all the fetters, greed,
feverish afflictions, the difficulties, pressure, slander, confusion,
and turbidity, and attain the impartial right Dharma praised by the
Buddha.”
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva upholds the pure
moral precepts in this way, even if in the course of a single day a
hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of wicked māras came to where
the bodhisattva was, each and every one of them bringing along
countless hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of celestial
nymphs, all of whom skillfully used techniques associated with the
five desires together with their feminine beauty in an attempt to
fool this man’s mind, and even if they held forth all sorts of differ­
ent kinds of precious objects of entertainment wishing to come and
disturb the bodhisattva’s resolve to remain on the path, the bod­
hisattva would then reflect thus: “These five desires are dharmas
that obstruct the path even to the point that they obstruct the real­
ization of the unsurpassed bodhi.”
As a consequence, he does not produce even a single thought
of desire and his mind remains as pure as that of the Buddha with
the sole exception of circumstances in which he uses skillful means
to teach beings. Even then, he still never relinquishes his resolve to
attain all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva would rather lose his own
body and life than produce afflictions in any being due to the causes
and conditions of desire. Thus he never does anything that might
cause afflictions to arise in any being.
From the time the bodhisattva succeeds in personally seeing the
Buddha on up to the present, his mind never raises even a single
thought of desire, how much the less might he engage in any such

484

The Flower Adornment Sutra
deed. As for the idea that he might engage in such a deed, that is
an impossibility. At such a time, the bodhisattva simply reflects in
this way:
Throughout the long night of their existences, all beings have
thought about the five desires, have pursued the five desires, have
become covetously attached to the five desires, have fixed their
minds on them, have indulged their defilement, have sunken
down and drowned in them, have drifted along in pursuit of
them, and thus have remained unable to acquire freedom from
them. I should now cause all these māras, celestial nymphs, and all
beings to dwell in the unsurpassed moral precepts and, after they
have come to dwell in the pure moral precepts, [I should enable
them] to establish the irreversible resolve to attain all-knowledge,
realize anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi, and finally enter the nirvāṇa
without residue.
And why should I do this? This is the kind of karmic work
we should do. We should follow along after the buddhas by pur­
suing cultivation and training such as this. Having engaged in
such training, we should abandon all bad actions and ignorance
arising from imputing the existence of a self. We should then use
wisdom to penetrate all the Buddha dharmas, explain them for
beings, and enable them to rid themselves of their inverted views.
Even so, he still realizes that it is not apart from beings that inverted
views exist and it is not apart from inverted views that beings exist.
It is not that beings exist within inverted views and it is not that
inverted views exist within beings. Nor is it the case that inverted
views are beings. Nor is it the case that beings are inverted views.
Inverted views are not inward dharmas. Inverted views are not out­
ward dharmas. Beings are not inward dharmas. Beings are not out­
ward dharmas. All dharmas are false and unreal, suddenly arising
and suddenly destroyed, devoid of any substantiality, like dreams,
like shadows, like conjurations, and like transformations. Thus they
deceive and delude the common person.
Someone who understands in this way is then able to completely
awaken to all the practices, achieve a penetrating comprehension of
saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, realize the bodhi of the Buddha, save himself
and enable the salvation of others, liberate himself and enable the
liberation of others, train himself and enable the training of oth­
ers, reach quiescence himself and enable the quiescence of others,
attain peace and security himself and enable the peace and secu­
rity of others, abandon defilement himself and enable others to
abandon defilement, purify himself and enable the purification of

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
485
others, reach nirvāṇa himself and enable others to reach nirvāṇa,
and attain happiness himself and enable others to attain happiness.
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva also reflects in this way:
I should follow all tathāgatas in abandoning all worldly practices,
in fulfilling all the dharmas of the buddha, in dwelling in the
station of unsurpassed impartiality, in contemplating all beings
equally, in gaining a clear comprehension of the objective realms,
in abandoning all faults, in cutting off all discriminations, in
relinquishing all attachments, in skillfully gaining emancipation,
and in developing a mind that is constantly established in unsur­
passed, ineffable, independent, unshakable, measureless, bound­
less, inexhaustible, formless, and extremely profound wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what is meant by the second of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s practices, the beneficial practice.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “non-opposing practice”? This bodhisattva always
cultivates the dharma of patience in which he is humbly deferen­
tial and reverentially respectful. He does not harm himself, does
not harm others, and does not harm both. He does not take things
himself, does not encourage others to take things, and does not join
with others in taking things. He is not attached to himself, is not
attached to others, and is not attached to both. And he does not
seek fame or offerings. He simply reflects in this manner: “I should
always teach the Dharma for beings and thus enable them to aban­
don every form of evil and cut off greed, hatred, delusion, arro­
gance, concealment, miserliness, jealousy, flattery, and deception,
thereby enabling them to become constantly established in patience
and gentleness.”
Sons of the Buddha, once the bodhisattva has developed the
dharma of patience in this way, suppose that a hundred thousand
koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of beings came to where he dwelt and
every one of those beings then transformationally created a hundred
thousand koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of mouths, and every one
of those mouths then uttered a hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of
asaṃkhyeyas of statements, namely statements one could not delight
in, statements regarding unwholesome dharmas, statements that
are displeasing, statements that no one could like, statements that
are inhumane and not such that a worthy would ever even utter,
statements that are not the wisdom of the āryas, statements that are
not such that an ārya would even utter, statements an ārya would
not even draw near to, statements that are extremely disgusting
and odious, statements that one simply could not bear to hear at all.

486

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Further, suppose that they all used these words and phrases to slan­
der and vilify the bodhisattva, and suppose that, in addition, every
one of those beings also had a hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of
asaṃkhyeyas of hands and every one of those hands brandished a
hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of weapons with
which they assailed and injured the bodhisattva, continuing to do
so for an entire asaṃkhyeya kalpa. When that bodhisattva encoun­
tered such extremely great and intense cruelties which would cause
all the hairs of one’s body to stand on end, then, right when his life
was about to be cut off, he would reflect in this way:
If, because of these sufferings, my mind wavered and became scat­
tered, that would be an instance of failing to even control myself,
failing to even protect myself, failing to clearly understand my
own situation, failing to even keep up my own cultivation, failing
to maintain my own right concentration, failing to stay quiescent
myself, and failing to even care for what is most dear to me.317 If I
were to indulge such attachment myself, then how could I enable
others to purify their minds?
At that time, the bodhisattva also has this thought: “From the very
start of the beginningless kalpas of the past, I have dwelt in the
midst of saṃsāra and have undergone every sort of bitter anguish.”
Reflecting in this way, he renews his self-encouragement, purifies
his mind, and becomes joyful. He skillfully adjusts and focuses
himself so that he is able to establish himself in the dharmas of the
Buddha while also enabling beings to attain these same dharmas.
He also reflects in this way:
This body is empty and quiescent, devoid of a self or anything
belonging to a self, devoid of any reality, empty by nature and non-
dual. Whether it be pain or pleasure, they are both nonexistent
because all dharmas are empty. I should completely understand
this myself and extensively explain it for others, thus enabling all
beings to extinguish these views.
Therefore, even though I have now encountered such intense
sufferings, I should patiently endure this to hold beings in mind
with loving-kindness, to benefit beings, to bestow happiness on
beings, to maintain sympathetic pity for beings, to attract and sus­
tain beings, to refrain from forsaking beings, to acquire enlight­
ened understanding myself, to maintain irreversible resolve, and
to progress along the path to buddhahood.
This is what is meant by the third of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
practices, the non-opposing practice.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
487
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “indomitable practice”? This bodhisattva cultivates
every form of vigor, namely, foremost vigor, great vigor, supreme
vigor, especially supreme vigor, the most supreme vigor, the most
sublime vigor, superior vigor, unexcelled vigor, peerless vigor, and
pervasive vigor.
He is naturally free of the three poisons, naturally free of arro­
gance, naturally free of concealment, naturally free of miserliness,
naturally free of flattery or deception, and naturally imbued with a
sense of shame and dread of blame. Hence he would never practice
vigor in a way that afflicts even a single being. Rather:
It is only to cut off all afflictions that he practices vigor;
It is only to extirpate the root of delusion that he practices vigor;
It is only to rid himself of all the habitual karmic propensities that
he practices vigor;
It is only to know all realms of beings that he practices vigor;
It is only to know with regard to all beings their dying in this place
and their being reborn in that place that he practices vigor;
It is only to know all beings’ afflictions that he practices vigor;
It is only to know all beings’ mental dispositions that he practices
vigor;
It is only to know all beings’ spheres of experience that he prac­
tices vigor;
It is only to know the superiority and inferiority of all beings’ fac­
ulties that he practices vigor;
It is only to know all beings’ mental actions that he practices vigor;
It is only to know the entire Dharma realm that he practices vigor;
It is only to know the fundamental nature of all dharmas of the
Buddha that he practices vigor;
It is only to know the equality of the nature of all dharmas of the
Buddha that he practices vigor;
It is only to know the identity of the nature of the three periods of
time that he practices vigor;
It is only to acquire the wisdom light of all dharmas of the Buddha
that he practices vigor;
It is only to realize the wisdom of all dharmas of the Buddha that
he practices vigor;
It is only to know the one true character of all dharmas of the
Buddha that he practices vigor;
It is only to know the boundlessness of all dharmas of the Buddha
that he practices vigor;

488

The Flower Adornment Sutra
It is only to acquire the vast, decisive, and skillful wisdom of all
dharmas of the Buddha that he practices vigor; and
It is only to acquire the wisdom with which one can distinguish
and expound on the phrases and meanings of all dharmas of
the Buddha that he practices vigor.
Sons of the Buddha, once the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has perfected
the practice of vigor such as this, suppose that there were someone
who asked:
Could it be that, for the sake of each one of all the beings in the
innumerably many worlds you could endure passing through
innumerable kalpas in the Avīci Hells, fully experiencing the
many sorts of sufferings, doing so to enable each of those beings
to encounter the appearance of countless buddhas in the world,
after which, due to having seen those buddhas, they would then
become able to attain the full enjoyment of the many sorts of hap­
piness and finally enter the nirvāṇa without residue, only after
which you yourself could realize anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi? Could
you or could you not do that?
He would reply, “I am able to do that.”
Now, suppose also that there were someone else who then spoke
to him in this way:
Suppose that there were an asaṃkhyeya of great oceans from all of
which you had to use a single hair to extract the waters, drop by
drop, until they were entirely emptied. Suppose, too, that there
were countless asaṃkhyeyas of worlds which then were ground
entirely to dust, whereupon you then had to count up every one of
those drops of water and each of those motes of dust and, having
come to know their number, you were then bound, for the sake
of beings, to pass through just that very number of kalpas during
which you were forced to undergo incessant suffering in each suc­
cessive mind-moment for that entire time.
On hearing this, the bodhisattva would not produce even a single
thought of regret, but rather would only be even more happy and
full of exultation, feeling deeply fortunate at having acquired such
an immensely fine benefit and realizing, “Through my own pow­
ers, I can enable those beings to be forever liberated from all suffer­
ings.”
Through these skillful means, the bodhisattva enables all beings
in all worlds to reach all the way to the nirvāṇa without residue.
This is what is meant by the fourth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
practices, the indomitable practice.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
489
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “unconfused practice”? This bodhisattva perfects
right mindfulness in which his mind is not scattered and con­
fused and in which it remains steadfastly unmoving, is the most
supremely pure, is measurelessly vast, and is free of confusion or
delusion. Because of this right mindfulness, he thoroughly under­
stands all worldly speech and is able to retain all world-tran­
scending discourses as well. That is to say, he is able to retain the
discourses on form dharmas and on formless dharmas, is able to
retain the discourses on the establishment of the particular nature
of form, and so forth, including his ability to retain the discourses
on the establishment of the particular nature of feelings, percep­
tions, karmic formative factors, and consciousness, doing so with
an unconfused mind.
In the world, dying here and being reborn there, his mind
remains unconfused. Entering the womb and emerging from the
womb, his mind remains unconfused. Making the resolve to attain
bodhi, his mind remains unconfused. Serving the good spiritual
guide, his mind remains unconfused. Diligently cultivating the
dharmas of the Buddha, his mind remains unconfused. Remaining
aware of the works of the māras, his mind remains unconfused.
Avoiding the works of the māras, his mind remains unconfused.
And cultivating the bodhisattva practices throughout an ineffable
number of kalpas, his mind remains unconfused.
This bodhisattva perfects such immeasurably vast right mind­
fulness across the course of countless asaṃkhyeyas of kalpas during
which he personally listens to the teaching of right Dharma from all
buddhas, bodhisattvas, and his good spiritual guides, in particular
listening to extremely profound dharmas, vast dharmas, dharmas
of adornment, dharmas having to do with various kinds of adorn­
ments, dharmas on explaining the many different kinds of names,
sentences, and literary forms, dharmas having to do with the bod­
hisattva’s adornments, unexcelled dharmas having to do with the
Buddha’s spiritual powers and radiance, pure dharmas on right
aspiration to achieve definite understanding, dharmas on not being
attached to anything in the world, dharmas on distinguishing all
aspects of the world, extremely vast dharmas, dharmas on aban­
doning all the cataracts of delusion and illuminating all beings, the
shared dharmas and unshared dharmas in all worlds, the unex­
celled dharmas of bodhisattvas, and the dharmas of sovereign mas­
tery associated with all-knowledge.

490

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Having heard the teaching of dharmas such as these, the bod­
hisattva passes through asaṃkhyeya kalpas without ever forgetting
or losing them. His mind always possesses uninterrupted recall of
them all.
And why is this? When, throughout countless kalpas, the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva has cultivated the practices, he has to the
very end of all that time refrained from tormenting or disturbing
any being in a way that might cause him to lose right mindful­
ness, has always refrained from damaging right Dharma, and has
refrained from ever cutting off roots of goodness. This is because
his mind has always increased in its vast wisdom.
Furthermore, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva is one who can never
be thrown into a state of confusion by any of the various differ­
ent kinds of sounds, including high and loud sounds, coarse and
rough sounds, the most extremely frightening sounds, sounds that
please the mind, sounds that the mind finds displeasing, clamorous
sounds disrupting the ear consciousness, and sounds that block or
damage the six sense faculties. Even if this bodhisattva were sub­
jected to hearing countlessly and innumerably many such good and
bad sounds as these which completely filled up an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds, he would still not have so much as a single mind-moment
during which his mind became scattered or confused by them. That
is to say:
His right mindfulness would be undisturbed;
His spheres of cognition would be undisturbed;
His samādhis would be undisturbed;
His penetration of extremely deep dharmas would be undis­
turbed;
His practice of the bodhi practices would be undisturbed;
His generation of the bodhi resolve would be undisturbed;
His recollection of the buddhas would be undisturbed;
His contemplation of genuine dharmas would be undisturbed;
His wisdom in teaching beings would be undisturbed;
His wisdom in purifying beings would be undisturbed; and
His decisive understanding of the extremely profound meaning
would be undisturbed.
Because he has not committed any bad karmic actions, he has no
obstacles due to bad karma. Because he never produces any afflic­
tions he has no affliction obstacles. Because he does not slight the
Dharma due to arrogance, he has no obstacles with respect to dhar­
mas. And because he does not slander right Dharma, he has no ret­
ribution obstacles.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
491
Sons of the Buddha, even if every one of the sounds such as
those mentioned above were to completely fill up an asaṃkhyeya
of worlds and continue incessantly for countless and innumerable
kalpas during which all of those sounds had the capacity to ruin
all of any being’s faculties of body and mind, they would still be
unable to interfere with this bodhisattva’s state of mind. When this
bodhisattva enters samādhi, abiding in dharmas of the āryas, he
reflects upon and contemplates all sounds, thoroughly knowing
those sounds’ characteristic signs of arising, abiding, and destruc­
tion and thoroughly knowing the nature of those sounds’ arising,
abiding, and destruction.
Once he hears them in this way, he does not produce any desire
for them, does not produce any hatred for them, and does not lose
his mindfulness. Rather he thoroughly grasps their signs without
any form of defiled attachment. He realizes that all sounds are
devoid of anything at all that exists, realizes that no reality is appre­
hensible in them, realizes that they have no agent of action, realizes
that they have no point of origin, and realizes that they are the same
as and no different from the Dharma realm itself.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva perfects quiescent physical,
verbal, and mental actions and proceeds all the way to all-knowl­
edge without ever turning back. He skillfully enters all gateways of
the dhyāna absorptions and realizes that all the samādhis are of the
same single essential nature. He completely knows all dharmas as
boundless and acquires genuine wisdom with respect to all dhar­
mas. He acquires the extremely deep samādhi that leaves sounds
behind, acquires an asaṃkhyeya of samādhi gateways, and increases
his measurelessly vast mind of great compassion.
At this time, in but a single mind-moment, the bodhisattva
acquires countless hundreds of thousands of samādhis. When he
hears sounds such as these, his mind remains undisturbed. He
causes his samādhi to gradually grow more vast and then reflects
in this way: “I should enable all beings to become established in
unsurpassed pure mindfulness, to attain irreversibility with
respect to all-knowledge, and to then ultimately succeed in enter­
ing the nirvāṇa without residue.”
This is what is meant by the fifth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
practices, the unconfused practice.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “well-manifested practice”? This bodhisattva is pure
in his physical karmic actions, pure in his verbal karmic actions,
and pure in his mental karmic actions. In this, he abides in the

492

The Flower Adornment Sutra
inapprehensibility of anything at all and thus manifests physical,
verbal, and mental karmic actions in which nothing whatsoever is
apprehensible. He is able to realize that the three types of karmic
action are all entirely devoid of anything at all that exists. Because
he is free of falsehood, he is free of the fetters. Whatever he mani­
fests has no inherent nature and has nothing on which it depends.
He abides in a mind accordant with reality, knows the inherent
nature of the immeasurable minds, knows the inherent nature of
all dharmas, and realizes that it is inapprehensible, signless, and
extremely deep and difficult to penetrate.
He abides in the right and definite position,318 true suchness, and
the nature of dharmas in which, through skillful means, he mani­
fests the taking on of birth and yet is free of karma and retribu­
tions. Neither produced nor destroyed, he abides in the realm of
nirvāṇa, abides in the quiescent nature, and abides in the natureless
nature of reality in which the path of words and speech is cut off,
in which he steps beyond all worlds, and in which he has nothing
upon which he depends.
He penetrates the dharma of abandoning discriminations and
remaining free of fetters and attachments. He enters the genuine
dharmas of the most supreme wisdom and enters the world-tran­
scending dharmas that no one in the world would be able to com­
pletely know. These are the signs associated with the bodhisattva’s
use of skillful expedient means to manifest taking birth.
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva thinks in this way: “As for
all beings, it is the absence of any inherent nature that constitutes
their nature. As for all dharmas, it is the unconditioned that con­
stitutes their nature. As for all lands, it is signlessness that consti­
tutes their characteristic sign. As for the three periods of time, their
existence is but a matter of words and speech. As for all words and
speech, they have no points of dependence on any dharma. And, as
for all dharmas, they also have no points of dependence on words
and speech.”
In this way, the bodhisattva understands all dharmas as
extremely profound, all worlds as quiescent, all dharmas of the
Buddha as not increased, the Dharma of the Buddha as no differ­
ent than worldly dharmas, worldly dharmas as no different than
the Dharma of the Buddha, the Dharma of the Buddha and worldly
dharmas as not existing in a mixed up or disorderly relationship,
and also as no different.
He completely realizes the uniform equality in the essential
nature of the Dharma realm, everywhere enters the three periods

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
493
of time, never abandons the great resolve to attain bodhi, never
retreats from his resolve to teach beings, ever increases his mind
of great kindness and compassion, and serves as a refuge for all
beings.
At this time, the bodhisattva also reflects in this way: “If I do
not ripen beings, then who will ripen them? If I do not train beings,
then who will train them? If I do not teach beings, then who will
teach them? If I do not enlighten beings, then who will enlighten
them? If I do not purify beings, then who will purify them? These
are things that it is right for me to do. These are things that I should
do.”
He then also reflects in this way:
If on my own I understand this extremely profound Dharma and
it is only I, this one person, who attains liberation in anuttara-
samyak-saṃbodhi, then all beings, blind, in the darkness, and hav­
ing no eyes, will enter into greatly hazardous paths, will be bound
up by the afflictions, and will become like gravely ill people who
constantly undergo intense pain as they dwell within the prison
of greed and craving, remaining unable to escape on their own.
They will fail then to leave behind the realms of the hells, the
hungry ghosts, the animals, and King Yama and they will remain
unable to extinguish their sufferings and abandon their evil kar­
mic deeds. They will forever dwell in the darkness of delusions,
will fail to perceive reality, and so will continue on in the cycle
of saṃsāra where they will have no means to gain emancipa­
tion. They will dwell in the eight difficulties, caught in attach­
ment to the many sorts of defilements, with minds blanketed and
obstructed by the many different sorts of afflictions where they
will be so confused by erroneous views that they will not then
travel on the path of what is right.
As the bodhisattva contemplates beings in this way, he has this
thought:
If, even before these beings have become ripened and even before
they have become trained, I were to forsake them and instead opt
for realization of anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi, this would be some­
thing I should not do. I should instead first teach beings and prac­
tice the bodhisattva practices for an ineffable-ineffable number
of kalpas. Those who have not yet become ripened, I should first
cause to be ripened. Those who have not yet undergone the train­
ing, I should first enable to undergo the training.
When this bodhisattva abides in this practice, if any of the devas,
māras, brahma heaven gods, śrāmaṇas, brahmans, or any of the

494

The Flower Adornment Sutra
world’s gandharvas, asuras, or other such beings merely succeed in
seeing him, briefly dwelling together with him, offering him expres­
sions of respect or solemn esteem, serving him, making offerings to
him, or briefly hearing something he says which then passes but
once through their minds—if they do any of these things, none of
them will have been done in vain, for they will thereby certainly
become bound to attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi. This is what is
meant by the sixth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s practices, the
well-manifested practice.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “unattached practice”? Sons of the Buddha, with an
unattached mind, in each succeeding mind-moment, this bodhisat­
tva is able to enter asaṃkhyeyas of worlds and purify asaṃkhyeyas
of worlds. In all those worlds, his mind remains free of attach­
ment. He goes and visits asaṃkhyeyas of tathāgatas, bows down in
reverence to them, serves them, and makes offerings to them of
asaṃkhyeyas of flowers, asaṃkhyeyas of incenses, asaṃkhyeyas of gar­
lands, asaṃkhyeyas of perfumes, powdered incenses, robes, precious
jewels, banners, pennants, and marvelous canopies, making offer­
ings of asaṃkhyeyas of each of these types of adornments.
Because offerings such as these are done for the sake of the ulti­
mate dharma of non-doing and because they are done for the sake
of abiding in inconceivable dharmas, he sees countless buddhas in
each succeeding mind-moment.
In the presence of all those buddhas, his mind has nothing to
which it is attached, and in all those buddha kṣetras, it also has noth­
ing to which it is attached. It also has no attachment to the buddhas’
major marks and subsidiary signs. So, too, in seeing the buddhas’
light and hearing the buddhas’ speaking Dharma, it also has noth­
ing to which it is attached. So, too, in all the congregations of bud­
dhas and bodhisattvas throughout the worlds of the ten directions,
it also has nothing to which it is attached.
After he has heard the Dharma of the Buddha, his mind is filled
with joyous delight, the strength of his resolve becomes vast, and he
becomes able to accumulate and able to practice all the bodhisattva
practices. Even so, he still has no attachment to the Dharma of the
Buddha.
Throughout an ineffable number of kalpas, this bodhisattva sees
an ineffable number of buddhas come forth and appear in the world.
Wherever each of those buddhas dwells, he serves them and makes
offerings to all of them to the very end of an ineffable number of
kalpas, doing so with insatiable resolve. In seeing the buddhas and

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
495
listening to the Dharma and in seeing the adornments of those bod­
hisattva congregations, he is never attached to anything. So too,
whenever he sees impure worlds, he has no hatred or disgust for
them.
And why is this? This is because this bodhisattva accords with
all dharmas of the Buddha in carrying on his contemplations.
Among all the dharmas of the buddhas, there is no defilement
and no purity, no darkness and no brightness, no difference and
no identity, no truth and no falseness, no peaceful security and
no hazardous difficulty, no right path, and no wrong path. In this
way, the bodhisattva deeply enters the Dharma realm and teaches
beings and yet forms no attachment to any being. He accepts and
upholds all dharmas and yet does not develop any attachment to
any dharma. He makes the resolve to attain bodhi and dwell in the
station of the Buddha and yet he does not develop any attachment
for the station in which the Buddha dwells.
Although he has that which he says, his mind is free of attach­
ment to anything which is said. He enters into the rebirth destinies
in which beings dwell and yet his mind has no attachment to the
destinies of beings. He completely knows samādhis, is able to enter
them and is able to abide in them, and yet his mind has no attach­
ment to samādhis.
He goes to visit countless buddha lands and yet, whether it be
entering them, seeing them, or dwelling within them, his mind has
no attachment to any buddha lands. When he leaves them, then,
too, he remains free of any nostalgic affection for them.
Because this bodhisattva-mahāsattva is able to remain free of
attachment in this way, in the Dharma of the Buddha, his mind is
unimpeded. He completely understands the bodhi of the Buddha,
attains realizations within the Dharma and vinaya, dwells in the
Buddha’s right teachings, cultivates the bodhisattva practices,
dwells in the bodhisattva’s resolve, and reflects on the bodhisat­
tva’s dharmas of liberation. His mind remains undefiled in those
stations in which the bodhisattvas dwell and also remains free of
any attachment to whatever the bodhisattvas practice.
He purifies the bodhisattva path and receives the bodhisattva’s
prediction. After he receives the prediction, he reflects in this way:
Common people are foolish and deluded, have no knowledge and
no vision, and have no faith and no understanding. They have no
intelligent actions, are stubbornly inured to their covetous attach­
ments, and they drift along in cyclic existence within saṃsāra.
They do not seek to see the Buddha, do not follow the enlightened

496

The Flower Adornment Sutra
guide, do not trust in the training, are confused and mistaken, fall
into error, and then enter into hazardous paths.
They do not respect the King of the Ten Powers and do not rec­
ognize the kindness of the bodhisattvas. They are affectionately
attached to wherever they dwell and when they hear that all dhar­
mas are empty, their minds are struck with great terror, where­
upon they avoid right Dharma and dwell in erroneous dharmas.
They abandon the level path and then enter dangerous and
difficult paths. They reject and turn their back on the ideas taught
by the Buddha and follow along in pursuit of the ideas promoted
by the māras. They become firmly attached to the stations of exis­
tence and do not relinquish them.
As the bodhisattva contemplates beings in this way, his great com­
passion increases and he develops roots of goodness, yet he remains
free of attachment. At that time, the bodhisattva has another
thought: “For the sake of but a single being, I should be willing to
dwell in every land throughout the worlds of the ten directions and
pass through an ineffable-ineffable number of kalpas teaching him
and ripening him. And just as I should do this for any single being,
so too should I do this for all beings in this very same manner while
still never in all that time becoming weary and inclined to abandon
that pursuit and go elsewhere.”
Moreover, even if he were to measure the entire Dharma realm
with the tip of a hair and, stopping at every single place the size of
the tip of a hair, he were to remain for the entirety of an ineffable-
ineffable number of kalpas during which he taught and trained all
the beings there—and if he continued to do so in every other place
the size of the tip of a hair in the same way as he did in that one
place the size of the tip of a hair—still, in all this time, even for the
instant of a finger snap, he would never generate any attachment to
a self or even conceive of a self or anything belonging to a self.
He could continue in this way in every place the size of a hair
tip to the very end of all future kalpas during which he continued
to cultivate the bodhisattva practices, all the while refraining from
attachment to the body, refraining from attachment to dharmas,
refraining from attachment to thoughts, refraining from attach­
ment to vows, refraining from attachment to samādhis, refraining
from attachment to his contemplations, refraining from attachment
to quiescent meditative absorption, refraining from attachment to
any sphere of cognition, refraining from attachment to teaching
and training beings, and also refraining from attachment to the
Dharma realm. And why is this? The bodhisattva has this thought:

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
497
I should contemplate the entire Dharma realm as being like a
magical conjuration, all buddhas as like shadows, the bodhisattva
practices as like a dream, and the dharmas spoken by the Buddha
as like echoes. All worlds are like transformations because they
are sustained by karmic retributions. Different bodies are like
mere conjurations because they arise through the power of the
karmic formative factors. All beings are like the mind because
they are characterized by all different kinds of defilements. All
dharmas are like the apex of reality because they cannot change.
He also has this thought:
I should practice the bodhisattva practices in all lands through­
out the ten directions to the very end of space and the Dharma
realm, should abide in a clear and penetrating comprehension of
all dharmas of the Buddha in every mind-moment, and should
keep right mindfulness manifested before me, doing so without
any grasping or attachment.
In this way, the bodhisattva contemplates the body as devoid of a
self and has an unimpeded ability to see the Buddha. It is in order
to teach beings that he expounds on dharmas, thereby enabling
them to bring forth measureless joyous delight and pure faith in the
Dharma of the Buddha. In rescuing and protecting everyone, his
mind remains free of weariness. Because he remains free of weari­
ness, wherever there are beings anywhere in all worlds who have
not yet become ripened and wherever they have not yet undergone
the training, he goes forth to all those places and uses skillful means
to teach and liberate them.
Those beings within them are possessed of all sorts of different
speech, all sorts of different karmic actions, all sorts of different
attachments, all sorts of different circumstances in which they are
established, all sorts of different ways in which they are associated
with each other, all different sorts of ways in which they drift along
in cyclic existence, all sorts of different endeavors in which they
engage, all sorts of different spheres of cognition, all sorts of dif­
ferent births, and all sorts of different circumstances in which they
die. Through great vows, he establishes himself among them and
then proceeds to teach them, never allowing his resolve to waver
or retreat, and also never bringing forth any defiled attachment for
even a single mind-moment.
Why is this so? Because he has achieved the state of having noth­
ing to which he is attached and nothing upon which he depends, in
benefiting self and benefiting others, he has attained the complete
fulfillment of purity.

498

The Flower Adornment Sutra
This is what is meant by the seventh of the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s practices, the unattached practice.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “difficult-to-attain practice”?
This bodhisattva perfects difficult to attain roots of goodness,
difficult to overcome roots of goodness, the most supreme roots
of goodness, indestructible roots of goodness, unexcelled roots of
goodness, inconceivable roots of goodness, inexhaustible roots of
goodness, roots of goodness possessed of the power of sovereign
mastery, roots of goodness possessed of great awesome virtue, and
roots of goodness that are of the same single nature as those of all
buddhas.
When this bodhisattva cultivates the practices, he acquires the
most supreme understanding of the Buddha’s Dharma and acquires
a vast understanding of the Buddha’s bodhi. He has never rested in
his implementation of the bodhisattva vows, continues on to the end
of all kalpas with unwearied resolve, never renounces his efforts
even in the midst of every sort of suffering, remains unshaken by
any of the many kinds of māras, is regarded with protective mind­
fulness by all buddhas, completely practices all of the bodhisattva’s
austere practices, cultivates the bodhisattva practices with unremit­
ting energetic diligence, and remains constantly irreversible in the
vows of the Great Vehicle.
After this bodhisattva has become established in this difficult-
to-attain practice, he is able in every succeeding mind-moment to
endure turning about for asaṃkhyeyas of kalpas in saṃsāra with­
out ever relinquishing the bodhisattva’s great vows. If, during all
this time, any beings serve him, make an offering to him, and so
forth, up to and including merely seeing him or hearing him, all of
them thereby become irreversibly bound to realize anuttara-samyak-
saṃbodhi.
Although this bodhisattva completely understands that beings
are nonexistent, he still never forsakes any of the realms of beings.
In this, he is like a ferry captain who does not remain on this shore,
does not remain on the far shore, and does not remain in the midst
of the flowing waters. Thus he is able to transport the beings on
this shore across to the far shore by always traveling over and back
without resting.
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva is also like this, for he does not
remain in saṃsāra, does not remain in nirvāṇa, and also does not
remain in the midst of the flowing currents of saṃsāra. Thus he is
able to transport the beings on this shore across to the far shore and

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
499
place them in a circumstance where they are peaceful and secure,
free of fear, and free of distress or anguish.
He also does not have any attachment to the number of beings
involved. He does not forsake a single being due to attachment to
many beings and does not forsake many beings due to attachment
to one particular being. He does not increase realms of beings, does
not decrease realms of beings, does not produce realms of beings,
does not extinguish realms of beings, does not put an end to realms
of beings, does not lengthen the duration of realms of beings, does
not make discriminations among the realms of beings, and does not
envision any duality among the realms of beings.
Why is this so? The bodhisattva has a deeply penetrating under­
standing of the realms of beings as like the Dharma realm and the
realms of beings and the Dharma realm as non-dual. Among non-
dual dharmas, there is no increase and no decrease, no production
and no extinction, no existence and no nonexistence, no grasping
and no dependency, and no attachment and no duality. And why is
this so? The bodhisattva completely understands that all dharmas
and the Dharma realm are non-dual.
In this way, the bodhisattva uses good skillful means to deeply
enter the Dharma realm and abide in signlessness even as he adorns
his own body with the signs of purity. He completely understands
dharmas as devoid of any [inherently existent] nature and yet he
is able to distinguish the characteristics of all dharmas. He does
not seize on the existence of beings and yet is able to completely
know the number of beings. He is not attached to the world and yet
manifests bodies within buddha kṣetras. He does not discriminate
among dharmas and yet skillfully enters into the dharmas of the
Buddha. He deeply penetrates meanings and principles and yet still
extensively expounds on spoken teachings. He completely under­
stands the desire-transcending apex of reality of all dharmas and
yet does not cut off his continuance of the bodhisattva path and
never retreats from the bodhisattva practices. He always diligently
cultivates the endless practices and yet enters the Dharma realm
with sovereign mastery.
Just as when one uses a wood drill to start a fire which then may
be used to start countless fires without letting the fire go out, so too
it is with the bodhisattva’s work of teaching beings which, being
endless, continues in the world forever without being extinguished.
It neither comes to an ultimate end nor does not come to an ulti­
mate end, is neither characterized by grasping nor non-grasping, is
neither dependent nor non-dependent, is neither involved just with

500

The Flower Adornment Sutra
worldly dharmas or Buddha dharmas, and is neither just those of
a common person or of someone who has attained the fruits of the
path.
The bodhisattva perfects just such a rare mind as this. As he
cultivates the bodhisattva practices, he may not teach about the
dharmas of the Two Vehicles, may not teach about the dharmas of
a buddha, may not teach about the world, may not teach about the
dharmas of the world, may not teach about beings, may not teach
about the nonexistence of beings, may not teach about defilement,
and may not teach about purity. And why is this? This is because
the bodhisattva knows all dharmas have no defilement and have no
grasping, do not evolve and do not regress.
When the bodhisattva cultivates amidst such quiescent, sublime,
extremely profound, and most supreme dharmas as these, he does
not even produce thoughts such as, “I am now cultivating this prac­
tice,” “I have already finished cultivating that practice,” and “I shall
cultivate this other practice in the future.” He is not attached to the
aggregates, the sense realms, the sense bases, the inward world, the
outward world, or the world that is both inward and outward. There
is nothing to which he is attached in the great vows he has brought
forth, in any of the pāramitās, or in any of the other dharmas.
And why is this so? In the entire Dharma realm, there is no
dharma called “access stage of the śrāvaka-disciple vehicle” or
“access stage of the pratyekabuddha vehicle.” Nor is there any dharma
called “access stage of the bodhisattva vehicle” or “access stage of
anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.” There is no dharma called “access stage
of the realms of the common person.” There is no dharma called
“access stage of defilement,” “access stage of purity,” “access stage
of saṃsāra,” or “access stage of nirvāṇa.”
And why is this? This is because all dharmas are neither dual nor
non-dual. They are like empty space which, even if one searched for
it in ten directions in the past, the future, or the present, one could
never grasp it even though it is not that there is no such thing as
empty space.
When the bodhisattva contemplates all dharmas in this way,
none of them can be apprehended even though it is not that there
is no such thing as all dharmas. He accords with reality, does not
deviate from it, does not fail to continue whatever he is doing, and
everywhere provides instruction in cultivating the bodhisattva
practices. He does not relinquish his great vows, his training of
beings, or his turning of the wheel of right Dharma. He does not

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
501
violate cause and effect and does not contradict the universal sub­
lime Dharma.
He everywhere abides in a state of equality with all tathāgatas of
the three periods of time, never allows the lineage of the buddhas
to be cut off, and never violates the true character of dharmas. He
deeply penetrates dharmas and his eloquence is inexhaustible. In
listening to the Dharma, he remains free of attachment and is able
to reach down to the very depths of the Dharma. He is well able
to reveal and expound on it with a fearless mind. He never relin­
quishes the station of buddhahood and does not oppose the dhar­
mas of the world. He appears everywhere within the world and yet
he does not become attached to the world.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva perfects the difficult-to-
attain mind of wisdom, cultivates all the practices, extricates beings
from the three wretched destinies, teaches them, trains them, and
establishes them in the path of all buddhas of the three periods of
time, enabling them to remain unwaveringly devoted to it. He also
reflects in this way:
The beings of the world do not know to repay kindness, become
involved in mutual opposition, become attached to erroneous
views, become confused and deluded by inverted views, are fool­
ish and ignorant, have no thoughts of faith, follow along after bad
friends, generate all kinds of evil cleverness, and are all full of
desire, ignorance, and all kinds of afflictions.
This is the circumstance for me to cultivate the bodhisattva
practices. If they knew to repay kindness, were intelligent, were
possessed of wise understanding, and hence good spiritual
friends filled the world, I would not cultivate the bodhisattva
practices among them.
Why is this so? I have no affection or disaffection for beings.
I do not wish for anything from them and do not seek so much
as even a single thread, hair, or word of praise from them. In
exhausting the kalpas of the future while cultivating the bod­
hisattva practices, I would never have so much as a single thought
of doing so for my own benefit. It is only because I wish to liberate
all beings, enable their purification, and assist their attainment of
eternal emancipation.
And why is this? As for the aspiration to serve beings as an
enlightened guide, the Dharma determines that it should be this
way. One does not seize on anything or seek anything. Rather, it
is solely for the sake of beings that one cultivates the bodhisattva
path and enables them to reach the peace and security of the far
shore and realize anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.

502

The Flower Adornment Sutra
This is what is meant by the eighth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
practices, the difficult-to-attain practice.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “practice of good dharmas”? This bodhisattva serves
as a clear and cool pool of Dharma for all the world’s devas, humans,
māras, brahma heaven gods, śrāmaṇas, brahmans, gandharvas, and
other such beings. He collects and preserves right Dharma and does
not allow the lineage of the buddhas to be cut off.
Due to acquiring the “pure light dhāraṇī,” his eloquence in teach­
ing Dharma and bestowing predictions is inexhaustible;
Due to acquiring the “complete meaning dhāraṇī,” his eloquence
with regard to meanings is endless;
Due to acquiring the “awakening to true Dharma dhāraṇī,” his elo­
quence with respect to dharmas is inexhaustible;
Due to acquiring the “exegesis of words and phrases dhāraṇī,” his
eloquence in the use of phrasings is inexhaustible;
Due to acquiring the “unimpeded gateway of boundless textual
passages and endless meanings dhāraṇī,” his facility in unim­
peded eloquence is inexhaustible;
Due to acquiring the “Buddha’s anointing of the crown dhāraṇī”
when receiving the anointing of his crown, his delight in elo­
quent expression is inexhaustible;
Due to acquiring the “awakening without relying on anyone else
dhāraṇī,” the light of his eloquence is inexhaustible;
Due to acquiring the “adaptive eloquence dhāraṇī,” his eloquence
in adapting to others is inexhaustible;
Due to acquiring the “exegetical facility in explaining all mean­
ings, passages, and texts dhāraṇī,” his exegetical eloquence is
inexhaustible; and
Due to acquiring the “boundless permutations dhāraṇī,” the
boundlessness of his eloquence is inexhaustible.
This bodhisattva’s solidly enduring great compassion everywhere
attracts beings. Throughout the great trichiliocosm, he transfor­
mationally manifests the golden-colored body and carries on the
Buddha’s works. Adapting to beings’ faculties, natures, and disposi­
tions and using the broad and long tongue, he manifests countless
voices from within a single voice, adapts to the time in teaching the
Dharma, and thereby enables them all to feel joyous delight.
Even if there were countless beings possessed of ineffably many
different kinds of karmic retributions who all came together in a
single place forming a congregation so vast that it completely filled
countless worlds and, as that bodhisattva sat in the midst of that

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
503
congregation, every one of those beings, each possessed of ineffably
many asaṃkhyeyas of mouths, each of which was able to utter a hun­
dred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of voices, each of which simultane­
ously emanated all of its voices, each of which spoke with different
phrasings and posed distinctly different questions—even then, the
bodhisattva would still be able to take in and respond to all of those
questions in but a single mind-moment and thereby enable all their
doubts to be dispelled.
And just as this would occur in this way with a single congrega­
tion, so too would it occur in the same way in an ineffable number
of such congregations.
Furthermore, if it was the case that there came forth in every
single mind-moment on the tip of but a single hair an ineffable-inef­
fable number of congregations at their sites of enlightenment and
this simultaneously occurred in every place the size of a single hair
tip in this very same way and did so to the very end of all kalpas of
the future with each congregation continuing on even though those
kalpas themselves might reach their end, and in every congregation
and in every succeeding mind-moment, everyone there each used
different phrasings and each posed distinctly different questions,
the bodhisattva would still be able to take in and deal with all of
those questions in but a single mind-moment, doing so without any
trepidation or timidity, and doing so without the least bit of doubt
or error. In such a circumstance, he would reflect in this way:
Even if all beings came and, using verbal actions such as these,
posed questions to me, I would still speak Dharma for them all
uninterruptedly and endlessly, thereby enabling them all to feel
joyous delight and dwell within the path of goodness, whereupon
I would then additionally enable them to thoroughly understand
everything spoken to them so that they could in turn teach all of
these different kinds of dharmas for the sake of yet other beings,
even as they remained free of any discriminations in regard to
language. Even if they used an ineffable-ineffable number of dif­
ferent kinds of words and phrases in coming and posing chal­
lenging questions, I would take them all in in but a single mind-
moment and reply to them all with but a single voice which would
then enable them all without exception to become awakened.
[That this could occur] is due to his having received the all-knowl­
edge bestowing anointing on the crown, is due to his having acquired
a treasury of unimpeded capacities, due to his having acquired the
perfectly full light of all dharmas, and due to his having completely
perfected the wisdom associated with all-knowledge.

504

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, after this bodhisattva-mahāsattva has
become established in the practice of good dharmas, he is able him­
self to become purified while also being able to use skillful means
free of attachment in everywhere benefiting all beings, doing so
even without perceiving the existence of any being who succeeds in
gaining emancipation. And just as this is the case in the worlds of
this great trichiliocosm, so too is this also this same way even in all
the ineffably many worlds of the great trichiliocosm in all of which
he manifests transformations of the golden form fully equipped
with its wondrous voice which, without being impeded in any way
with respect to any dharma, carries on the Buddha’s works.
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva perfects ten
kinds of bodies, namely:
The body not of the destinies that enters the boundless Dharma
realm, this due to extinguishing all that is worldly;
The body that enters all the destinies of the boundless Dharma
realm, this due to taking birth in all worlds;
The unborn body which dwells in the unproduced, this due to the
dharma of uniform equality;
The undestroyed body in which all is extinguished, this due to
inapprehensibility through words and speech;
The unreal body, this due to attainments accordant with reality;
The non-false body, this due to manifesting in accordance with
whatever is fitting;
The unmoving body, this due to transcendence of dying here and
being reborn there;
The undestroyed body, this due to the indestructibility of the
Dharma realm’s nature;
The body of a single character, this due to the severance of the
path of all discourse in the three periods of time; and
The signless body, this due to being well able to contemplate the
characteristic signs of dharmas.
Through his perfection of these ten kinds of bodies, the bodhisattva:
Serves as a shelter for all beings through nurturing the growth of
all roots of goodness;
Serves as a savior of all beings through enabling them to acquire
great peace and security;
Serves as a refuge for all beings through becoming a great place
of reliance for them;
Serves as a guide for all beings through enabling them to acquire
the unsurpassed emancipation;

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
505
Serves as the teacher for all beings through enabling them to pen­
etrate into the genuine Dharma;
Serves as a lamp for all beings through enabling them to clearly
see karmic retributions;
Serves as a light for all beings through enabling the illumination
of the extremely profound and sublime Dharma;
Serves as a torch for everyone throughout all three periods of time
through enabling them to see the light and awaken to the genu­
ine Dharma;
Serves as illumination for everyone in the world through enabling
them to enter the land of radiance; and
Serves as a source of brightness for all of the destinies through
manifesting the sovereign masteries of the Tathāgata.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what is meant by the ninth of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s practices, the practice of good dharmas.
Once the bodhisattva has become established in this practice, he
serves all beings as a clear and cool pool of Dharma through his
ability to reach the very source of all dharmas of the Buddha.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “genuine practice”? This bodhisattva perfects speech
of the foremost degree of truthfulness. He is able to act in accor­
dance with his speech and is able to speak in accordance with his
actions.
This bodhisattva studies the true speech of all buddhas of the
three periods of time, enters the lineage of all buddhas of the three
periods of time, acquires roots of goodness identical to those of all
buddhas of the three periods of time, acquires the non-dual speech
of all buddhas of the three periods of time, and, by following along
with the Tathāgata in training, acquires perfectly developed wis­
dom. This bodhisattva perfects:
The knowledge that knows with respect to beings what is and is
not possible;
The knowledge that knows the karmic retributions as they occur
in the past, future, and present;
The knowledge that knows the relative sharpness and dullness of
all faculties;
The knowledge that knows all the different kinds of realms;
The knowledge that knows all the different kinds of understand­
ing;
The knowledge that knows the end points of all paths;

506

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The knowledge that knows with respect to all dhyānas, liberations,
and samādhis their relative defilement or purity as well as
when they have and have not arisen;
The knowledge that recalls at will beings’ past-life existences as
they have transpired in all worlds;
The knowledge of the heavenly eye; and
The knowledge of the complete cessation of the contaminants.
Even so, he never abandons the bodhisattva practices. And why is
this? This is because he teaches all beings and enables them all to
attain purification. This bodhisattva also generates such especially
superior thoughts as this:
If I failed to enable all beings to abide in the unsurpassed path of
liberation and instead went ahead and realized anuttara-samyak-
saṃbodhi before having done so, then that would contradict my
original vows and that would be something I should not do.
Therefore I must first enable all beings to attain the unsurpassed
bodhi and enter the nirvāṇa without residue and only afterward
realize buddhahood.
And why? It is not the case that beings requested me to make
this resolve. Rather, on my own, I became an uninvited friend for
beings, wishing to first enable all beings to fully develop their
roots of goodness and realize all-knowledge. It is due to not being
attached to anything in the world that I become one of the most
supreme sort. It is due to dwelling on the ground of the unexcelled
trainer that I become of the most superior sort. It is through com­
prehending the boundlessness of beings that I become one who
leaves behind the obscurations to vision. It is through fulfillment
of original vows that I become one who has done what is to be
done. It is as a function of the bodhisattva’s merit-based adorn­
ments that I become skillful in manifesting transformations. And
it is due to having been drawn forth and sustained by all buddhas
of the three periods of time that I become a good and reliable ref­
uge for others.
Because this bodhisattva-mahāsattva does not abandon his origi­
nal vows, he is able to enter the adornment with unexcelled wis­
dom, benefit beings, enable them all to become completely satisfied,
accord with his original vows, and see to their reaching the ultimate
degree of fulfillment. His achieves sovereign mastery of wisdom in
all dharmas and enables all beings everywhere to attain purity. In
each succeeding mind-moment, he roams everywhere throughout
the worlds of the ten directions. In each succeeding mind-moment,
he goes and pays his respects in an ineffable-ineffable number of

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
507
buddha lands, and in each succeeding mind-moment, he sees an
ineffable-ineffable number of buddhas and the pure lands adorned
by buddhas. He manifests the Tathāgata’s masterful spiritual pow­
ers everywhere throughout the Dharma realm and the realm of
empty space. This bodhisattva manifests countless bodies which
everywhere enter the worlds and have nothing on which they rely.
Within his own body, he reveals all lands, all beings, all dharmas,
and all buddhas.
This bodhisattva knows beings’ various kinds of thoughts,
various kinds of desires, various kinds of understandings, various
kinds of karmic retributions, and various kinds of roots of good­
ness. Then, adapting to what is fitting for them, he manifests bodies
for them and thereby trains them.
He regards the bodhisattvas as like conjurations, all dharmas
as like transformations, the appearance of buddhas in the world as
like reflections, and all worlds as like a dream. He acquires an end­
less treasury of forms of meanings and forms of texts and, with
sovereign mastery in right mindfulness, has decisive and complete
understanding of all dharmas. His wisdom is of the most supreme
sort which enters the true character of all the samādhis and dwells
on the ground of the one nature and non-duality.
Because all beings are attached to dualities, the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva who is established in the great compassion cultivates
such dharmas of quiescence as these, acquires the ten powers of the
Buddha, enters the Dharma realm of Indra’s net, and perfects the
unimpeded liberations of the Tathāgata and the roar of a heroically
courageous great lion among men. He acquires the fearlessnesses,
becomes able to turn the unimpeded wheel of the pure Dharma,
acquires wisdom and the liberations, and completely knows the
spheres of experience in all worlds. He puts an end to the whirlpool
of saṃsāra and enters the great ocean of wisdom in which, for the
sake of all beings, he protects and preserves the right Dharma of all
buddhas of the three periods of time. He reaches the very source of
the true character of the ocean of all dharmas of the Buddha.
After the bodhisattva has come to abide in this genuine prac­
tice, he enables the awakening, joyous delight, and purity of all
the world’s devas, humans, māras, brahma heaven gods, śrāmaṇas,
brahmans, gandharvas, asuras, and other such beings who draw
near to him. This is what is meant by the tenth of the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s practices, the genuine practice.

508

The Flower Adornment Sutra
At that time, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, worlds in each of
the ten directions as numerous as the atoms in a buddha kṣetra all
moved and shook in six ways, namely: movement, universal move­
ment, equal-and-universal movement, rising, universal rising, equal-
and-universal rising, upward thrusting, universal upward thrusting,
equal-and-universal upward thrusting, shaking, universal shaking,
equal-and-universal shaking, roaring, universal roaring, equal-and-
universal roaring, striking, universal striking, and equal-and-univer­
sal striking.
It rained down marvelous heavenly flowers, celestial perfumes,
powdered celestial incenses, heavenly flower garlands, celestial rai­
ment, heavenly jewels, and heavenly adornments as celestial music
resounded, attended by the emanation of celestial radiance and the
chorusing of the sublime voices of the devas.
Just as in this world there were these spiritual transformations
attending the speaking of the ten practices in the Suyāma Heaven
Palace, so too was this also so in the worlds of the ten directions.
Moreover, because of the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from beyond
a number of worlds off in each of the ten directions as numerous as
the atoms in ten myriads of buddha kṣetras, bodhisattvas as numerous
as the atoms in ten myriads of buddha kṣetras all came there and, fill­
ing up the ten directions, addressed Forest of Meritorious Qualities
Bodhisattva, saying:
Son of the Buddha, it is good indeed, good indeed that you have
been so well able to expound on the bodhisattva practices. We are
all identically named Forest of Meritorious Qualities and we all
came from countries known as Banner of Meritorious Qualities.
The tathāgatas in those lands are all known as Universal Meritorious
Qualities. These dharmas were also taught in the abodes of all of
our own buddhas in which the assemblies, retinues, phrases, and
meanings were all also precisely as set forth here, without any addi­
tions or subtractions.
Son of the Buddha, it is by having received the assistance of
the Buddha’s spiritual powers that we have come and entered this
assembly to serve as witnesses for you verifying that, throughout
the worlds of the ten directions, the circumstances are just the same
as they are here.
At that time, assisted by the spiritual power of the Buddha, Forest
of Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva surveyed the entire assembly
throughout the ten directions of the Dharma realm and, wishing to

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
509
ensure that the lineage of the buddhas would not be cut off, wishing
to ensure that the lineage of the bodhisattvas would be pure, wishing
to ensure that the lineage of the vows would continue on irreversibly,
wishing to ensure that the lineage of the practices would continue
on forever, wishing to ensure that the lineages of the three periods
of time would all be equal, wishing to draw together all the buddha
lineages of the three periods of time, wishing to reveal and expound
upon all the roots of goodness which have been established, wishing
to contemplate the faculties of all beings, wishing to understand the
workings of the afflictions, habitual karmic propensities, and mental
actions, and wishing to completely illuminate the bodhi of all bud­
dhas, he then spoke these verses:
We pay single-minded reverence to the Honored Ones of Ten Powers,
those who are immaculate, pure, and possessed of unimpeded vision,
and whose spheres of action are deep, far-reaching, and peerless.
They abide in the path that is like empty space.
The most supreme among humans of the past
who had countless meritorious qualities, were free of attachments,
and whose courage was foremost and utterly without peer—
It was they who, having transcended the dusts, traveled this path.
In the present, throughout the lands of the ten directions,
they are well able to reveal and expound upon the supreme meaning.
Having abandoned all transgressions and become foremost in purity,
it is they who, depending on nothing, travel this path.
In the future, all those lions among men,
roaming everywhere throughout the Dharma realm,
having already brought forth the great compassion of all buddhas—
They who are the benefactors will travel this path.
All the peerless Honored Ones throughout the three periods of time,
those who independently extinguish the darkness of delusion
and then who abide in the equality of all dharmas—
It is those persons with the great powers who travel this path.
Those who everywhere see the countless and boundless realms,
including all realms of existence and all the destinies, and who
having seen them, their minds do not discriminate among them—
It is they who are unshakable who travel this path.
Those who completely understand everything in the Dharma realm,
who possess the most pure comprehension of the supreme meaning,
and who have forever destroyed hatred, arrogance, and delusion—
It is they who, possessed of the meritorious qualities, travel this path.

510

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Those who skillfully distinguish among the various kinds of beings,
yet in all of them penetrate the true nature of the Dharma realm,
and who naturally awaken without having relied on others—
It is they who, being the same as empty space, travel this path.
Those who go forth to all lands throughout empty space
to discourse on Dharma, extensively making use of analogies,
and whose discourse is pure and unassailable by anyone—
It is those supreme munis319 who travel this path.
Those who have completely fulfilled steadfast irreversibility,
who have perfected the venerable and most supreme Dharma,
and whose endless vow power reaches the far shore of perfection—
It is the path that is traveled by those who are so skillful in cultivation.
Those who are able to know and see all without exception
of all the vast, extremely profound, and sublime spheres of cognition
on all the countless and boundless grounds—
It is the path that is traveled by those lions of doctrinal discourse.
Those who completely comprehend all passages and meanings,
who utterly vanquish all proponents of deviant doctrines,
and who, being certain about the Dharma, are free of doubts—
It is those great munis who travel this path.
Those who leave all the disastrous faults of the world far behind,
who everywhere bestow peaceful security and happiness on beings,
and who are able to serve as peerless great Master Guides—
It is those of just such supreme qualities who travel this path.
Those who constantly bestow fearlessness on beings,
who thus enable them all to rejoice,
and who, pure in mind, abandon the turbidity of the defilements—
It is those who are unequaled in this who travel this path.
Those of pure mind karma who are ultimately trained in goodness,
who have left conceptual elaboration, are free of verbal transgressions,
and whose awesome light, perfectly full, is admired by the many—
It is those most supreme ones who travel this path.
Those who, entering the genuine meaning, have reached the far shore,
who dwell in bases of meritorious qualities with ever-quiescent minds,
and who buddhas bear in protective mindfulness, never forgetting—
It is those who extinguish all the existences who travel this path.
Those who have transcended self, who do not torment or inflict injury,
and who constantly proclaim right Dharma with a loud voice
that has no lands of the ten directions it does not pervade—
It is they who are indescribable even by analogy who travel this path.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
511
Those who have already fulfilled the practice of dāna pāramitā,
who are adorned with marks and signs of the hundredfold merit,
and who, when beheld by beings, cause them all to be delighted—
It is those possessed of most supreme wisdom who travel this path.
Those who, on wisdom grounds that are extremely difficult to enter,
are able, with sublime wisdom, to become well established,
and whose minds have become the most ultimately unshakable—
It is those of such solid practice as this who travel this path.
Those able to enter all places throughout the Dharma realm,
who achieve the ultimate wherever they enter, and
whose mastery of spiritual powers have nothing they do not include—
It is those with such Dharma radiance who travel this path.
Those great munis who are the equal of the unequaled,
who diligently cultivate samādhis characterized by non-duality, and
whose minds always abide in absorption and delight in quiescence—
It is those with such universal vision who travel this path.
Those for whom all lands, both tiny and vast,
are interpenetrating even as they each retain their distinctions,
and who completely fathom such spheres of cognition as these—
It is those kings of the mountain of wisdom who travel this path.
Those whose minds, always radiantly pure, abandon all defilements,
who have no attachments anywhere in the three realms of existence,
and whose guarding of the many precepts has reached the far shore—
It is those with pure minds such as these who travel this path.
Those whose wisdom is indescribably boundless, and who,
everywhere throughout the Dharma realm and the realm of space,
are well able to cultivate, train, and dwell within it—
It is those possessed of such vajra wisdom who travel this path.
Those whose wisdom skillfully penetrates and entirely pervades
the spheres of cognition of all buddhas of the three periods of time
and who have never for a moment raised any thoughts of weariness—
It is those most supreme ones who travel this path.
Those well able to distinguish the dharmas of the ten powers,
who completely know the end points of all paths,
and who attain sovereign mastery in unimpeded physical action—
It is those with bodies possessed of such qualities who travel this path.
Those who in the countless and boundless realms of the ten directions
resolve with respect to all those beings within them:
“I will rescue and protect them all and never abandon them”—
It is those possessed of such fearlessness who travel this path.

512

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Those who diligently cultivate all dharmas of the buddhas,
whose minds are always vigorous and neither indolent nor weary,
and who engage in the purification of all worlds—
It is those great dragon kings who travel this path.
Those who fully know the differences in beings’ faculties as well as
the countless variations in each one’s inclinations and understandings,
and who have clear comprehension of all the many different realms—
It is these with such universal penetration who travel this path.
Those who go to and take on innumerable births
in the countless kṣetras of the worlds of the ten directions,
and yet have never become weary for even a single mind-moment—
It is they who abide in joyous delight who travel this path.
Those who everywhere emanate a web of countless light rays
which illuminate all worlds with dazzling radiance
so those on whom their light shines penetrate all dharmas’ nature—
It is those who possess such fine wisdom who travel this path.
Those who cause quaking throughout countless koṭīs of nayutas
of lands throughout the ten directions,
yet never cause the beings in them to be frightened by this—
This is the path traveled by they who benefit the world.
Those who well understand all dharmas of language,
who, in responding to challenging questions are ultimately skillful,
and whose sagacity and rhetorical wisdom have nothing not known—
This is the path traveled by those of such fearlessness.
Those who well understand both inverted and upright lands,
whose analytic reflections have reached the very ultimate,
and who enable everyone to abide on the ground of the infinite320—
This is the path traveled by those possessed of supreme wisdom.
Those who, for the sake of seeking the path to buddhahood,
cultivate all the countless nayutas of meritorious qualities
and who, in all of those matters, bring them to a state of perfection—
This is the path traveled by they who pursue such infinite practices.
Those who are great world-transcending masters of the doctrine
who with foremost eloquence roar the lion’s roar
and who everywhere enable the many beings to reach the far shore—
This is the path traveled by they who are possessed of pure minds.
The foremost dharma of all buddhas’ anointing the crown—
Those who have already acquired this dharma anointing their crowns
and whose minds constantly dwell within the gates of right Dharma—
It is they who are possessed of such vast minds who travel this path.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
513
Those who, with regard to the countless different types of all beings,
completely understand the minds of all of them everywhere
while resolutely preserving the treasury of the Buddha’s Dharma—
It is they who are as lofty as Mount Sumeru who travel this path.
Those who are able in each and every language
to manifest countless voices for all,
to enable those beings to understand, each according to their type—
These who possess such unimpeded vision travel this path.
Those whose wisdom skillfully enters all dharmas of text and speech,
who do not indulge in discriminations about them,
and who abide in genuine spheres of cognition—
This is the path traveled by these who perceive the nature.
Those dwelling securely in the extremely deep ocean of great Dharma,
who are well able to verify the truth of all dharmas,
and who understand the genuine gateway of dharmas’ signlessness—
This is the path traveled by those who behold reality.
Those who go to visit every buddha land,
doing so to the very end of countless boundless kalpas,
and whose contemplative reflections never cease even briefly—
This is the path traveled by those who never indulge in indolence.
Those who, on the tip of but a single hair, clearly see
all the countless and innumerable tathāgatas
whose various kinds of names are in each case different—
This is the path traveled by those possessed of pure merit.
Those who, on the tip of but a single hair, see all buddhas,
countless and ineffably many,
and also see this everywhere throughout the Dharma realm—
It is those very sons of the Buddha who travel this path.
Those who in but a single mind-moment clearly see
all the countless, boundless, and innumerable kalpas,
knowing the unfixed character of their length or brevity—
This is the path traveled by those of such liberated practice.
Those able to cause those who see them to not have done so in vain,
enabling them all to plant causal affinities with the Buddha’s Dharma,
even as they still have minds free of attachment to whatever they do—
This is the path traveled by all those supreme ones.
Those who throughout nayutas of kalpas always meet the buddhas,
who never become weary for even a single mind-moment,
and who have minds that become ever more joyful—
This is the path traveled by those whom one does not see in vain.

514

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Those who, throughout countless boundless kalpas,
contemplate all realms of beings,
and yet never perceive the existence of even a single being—
This is the path traveled by such steadfast eminences.
Those who cultivate a treasury of boundless merit and wisdom
and everywhere serve as a clear and cool pool of meritorious qualities
as they benefit all the many types of beings—
It is those who are foremost among all people who travel this path.
As for all the Dharma realms’ countlessly many types of beings
existing everywhere throughout the realm of empty space,
they fully understand they exist on the basis of verbal designations.
This is the path traveled by those who roar the lion’s roar.
Those who are able within every samādhi
to everywhere enter all the innumerable samādhis,
reaching in them all the Dharma gateways’ deeply abstruse places—
It is these moons of the doctrine who travel this path.
Those who diligently cultivate the power of patience to perfection,
who are able to acquire patience in the supreme dharma of quiescence,
and whose minds abide in equanimity without ever wavering—
This is the path traveled by those possessed of boundless wisdom.
Those who sit in one world in a single sitting place
with their body unmoving and constantly quiescent,
and yet who in all of them everywhere manifest bodies—
It is those with boundlessly many bodies who travel this path.
Those who cause countless boundless lands
to all enter together into a single atom
in which they are all enveloped without any mutual interference—
It is those engaging in such boundless reflections who travel this path.
Those who completely understand what is and is not possible,
who are everywhere able to enter the stations of the powers,
and who perfect the Tathāgata’s most superior powers—
This is the path traveled by those foremost in the powers.
Those who constantly use wisdom to completely know
the countless and boundless karmic retributions
throughout the past, the future, and the present—
This is the path traveled by those of such penetrating understanding.
Those who entirely know what is and is not timely in the world
and then train all beings in accordance with what is appropriate,
in all cases adapting to what is fitting for them, never erring in this—
This is the path traveled by those with such skillful comprehension.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
515
Those skillfully guarding physical, verbal, and mental karmic actions,
constantly enabling them to rely on the Dharma as they cultivate,
abandoning all grasping attachment and subduing the many māras—
This is the path traveled by those possessed of such wise minds.
Those who acquire skillful means in all dharmas,
who are able to enter true suchness’s station of uniform equality,
and who eloquently and endlessly propagate the teachings—
This is the path traveled by those cultivating the Buddha’s practices.
Those who have already perfectly fulfilled the dhāraṇī gateways,
who are well able to calmly abide in the treasury of the unimpeded,
and who have a penetrating understanding of all dharma realms—
This is the path traveled by those of such deep penetration.
Those with minds equal to and wisdom the same as
all buddhas of the three periods of time, such that
they are of a single nature, a single character, and are no different—
This is the path traveled by those of the unimpeded lineage.
Those who have already gotten rid of all of delusion’s obscurations,
who have deeply entered the vast ocean of wisdom,
and who everywhere bestow the purified eyes on beings—
This is the path traveled by those who have the eyes.321
Those who have already fulfilled the impartial superknowledges
and non-dual practice of all the Master Guides
and who have gained the Tathāgata’s powers of sovereign mastery—
This is the path traveled by those skilled in cultivation.
Those who travel everywhere to all worlds,
who everywhere rain down the boundless rain of sublime Dharma,
and who enable all to gain decisive understanding of its meaning—
This is the path traveled by those who act as Dharma clouds.
Those able to deeply produce pure and forever irreversible faith
in the wisdom and liberations of the Buddha
and who use such faith to then produce the faculty of wisdom—
This is the path traveled by those who are skilled in the training.
Those able in but a single mind-moment
to completely know all beings without exception
and fully understand the inherent nature of those beings’ minds—
This is the path traveled by those realizing the absence of any nature.
Those able to transform and go forth
to all the countless lands throughout the Dharma realm
with their bodies most sublime and utterly beyond compare—
This is the path traveled by those of such peerless practices.

516

The Flower Adornment Sutra
In the boundlessly and innumerably many buddha kṣetras
in which all the countless buddhas dwell,
the bodhisattva manifests and appears directly before them all,
drawing near, making offerings, and bringing forth reverent esteem.
The bodhisattva is able, using but a single body,
to enter samādhi and then abide in quiescent meditative absorption
in which he enables his bodies to be seen in countless numbers,
every one of which comes forth from within his samādhi.
The bodhisattva’s dwelling is of the most profoundly sublime sort
and his actions and deeds transcend all conceptual proliferation.
His mind is pure and forever pleased and blissful,
and he is able to cause all beings to be filled with joyous delight.
All faculties and skillful means, each of which differ,
he is able with wisdom to clearly see,
yet he fully knows all faculties have nothing on which they are based.
This is the path traveled by those who train those difficult to train.
He is able to use expedient means and make skillful distinctions
and thus in all dharmas he attains sovereign mastery.
The worlds throughout the ten directions are each different.
He resides in them all, doing the Buddha’s works.
His faculties are all sublime and so too are his actions.
He is able to extensively teach the Dharma for the sake of beings.
Who, having heard him do so, would not feel moved to rejoice?
This is the path traveled by those who are like empty space.
His wisdom eye is purified and equaled by no one
and thus it clearly sees all dharmas.
Wisdom such as this is skillful in making distinctions.
This is the path traveled by those who are peerless.
By all his cultivation he causes
all his endlessly vast merit to become ultimate
as he enables all beings to become completely pure.
This is the path traveled by those who are beyond compare.
He exhorts all to cultivate the dharmas that are aids to enlightenment,
enables all to succeed in dwelling on the ground of skillful means,
and liberates innumerably many beings,
even as he has never even briefly produced any perception of a being.
He contemplates the conditions of all with potential,
first guarding their minds, causing them to be free of contentiousness,
then everywhere showing beings the station of peace and security.
This is the path traveled by those possessed of skillful means.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
517
He perfects the most superior sorts of foremost wisdom,
completely fulfills measureless and boundless wisdom,
and is fearless in the midst of the fourfold congregation.
This is the path traveled by those with knowledge of skillful means.
All worlds as well as all dharmas—
He is able to everywhere enter them all and attain sovereign mastery
while also entering into all congregations
where he liberates the many types of beings, countless in number.
In all lands throughout the ten directions,
he beats the great Dharma drum, awakens the many kinds of beings,
and becomes the most unexcelled of the benefactors of the Dharma.
This is the path traveled by those beyond perishing.
Even as his single body sits erect in the full lotus posture,
it fills up the countless kṣetras of the ten directions
and thus enables his body to not be confined.
This is the path traveled by those who access the Dharma body.
He is able from a single meaning or a single textual passage
to expound on countlessly and boundlessly many dharmas
the limits of which one could never discover.
This is the path traveled by those of boundless wisdom.
He is skillful in cultivating and training in the Buddha’s liberations,
acquires the Buddha’s unimpeded wisdom,
perfects the fearlessnesses, and becomes the Hero of the World.
This is the path traveled by those possessed of skillful means.
He completely knows the oceans of worlds of the ten directions,
also knows the oceans of all the buddha kṣetras,
and fully knows all the oceans of wisdom and oceans of Dharma.
All beings who behold him are moved to rejoice.
He sometimes appears as entering the womb, or as first taking birth,
or appears as gaining right enlightenment at the site of enlightenment.
In all ways such as these, he enables the world to see him.
This is the path traveled by those who are boundless.
In countless koṭīs of lands,
he manifests his bodies as entering nirvāṇa,
but in truth never forsakes his vows by taking refuge in quiescence.
This is the path traveled by the heroic guardian of the doctrine.
His solid, subtle, and esoteric single sublime body
is the same as the Buddha’s and not any different.
As he adapts to beings, they each behold a different appearance.
This is the path traveled by those with the one true body.

518

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The Dharma realm is the same, devoid of difference,
and fully possessed of the countless and boundless meanings.
He delights in beholding, mind unmoving, its character of oneness.
This is the path traveled by those with the wisdom of the three times.
His establishment and support of all beings and the Buddha’s Dharma
are in all cases of the most ultimate sort
and all of his powers of sustenance are the same as the Buddha’s.
Those who are their supreme sustainers travel this path.
His power of unimpeded physical transport is like that of the Buddha.
His heavenly eye is unimpeded and is the most thoroughly purified.
His ear faculty is unimpeded in the skillfulness of its hearing.
This is the path traveled by those with unimpeded minds.
He has completely fulfilled all the spiritual superknowledges,
all of which are perfected in accordance with his wisdom,
and his thorough knowing of everything is matched by no one.
This is the path traveled by those who are worthy and wise.
His mind abides in right meditative absorptions, unwavering,
his wisdom is boundlessly vast,
and he clearly comprehends all the spheres of cognition.
This is the path traveled by those who see everything.
He has reached the far shore of perfection in meritorious qualities,
is able to accord with the correct sequence in liberating beings,
and his resolve in this is ultimately insatiable.
This is the path traveled by those who are forever diligent.
As for all the dharmas of all buddhas of the three periods of time,
his knowledge and vision embraces all of these.
He is one who has been born from the lineage of the tathāgatas.
All those sons of the Buddha travel this path.
His use of words and phrases in adapting to beings is already perfect,
he skillfully vanquishes all perverse and contradictory doctrines,
and he is ever able to advance toward the bodhi of the Buddha.
This is the path traveled by those who possess boundless wisdom.
The places touched by a single ray of his light are boundless,
for it completely pervades all lands throughout the ten directions.
He everywhere enables the world to receive great illumination.
This is the path traveled by those who dispel the darkness.
As befits what they should see or to whom they should offer gifts,
he manifests a tathāgata’s pure body for them
and thus teaches hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of beings.
His adornment of buddha kṣetras is also like this.

Chapter 21 — The Ten Practices
519
For the sake of enabling beings to transcend the world,
he cultivates all the marvelous practices.
This practice is so boundlessly vast,
how could there be anyone able to know its extent?
Even if one were to issue such an ineffable number of division bodies
that they equaled all the empty space throughout the Dharma realm
and they all joined in proclaiming praises of his meritorious qualities,
no one could finish even after a hundred thousand myriads of kalpas.
The bodhisattva’s meritorious qualities are so boundless
and all of his cultivation is so completely fulfilled
that, even if countlessly and boundlessly many buddhas
tried for countless kalpas to describe it, they still could never finish.
How much the less might any of the world’s devas or humans,
any of the śrāvaka disciples, or any of the pratyekabuddhas
ever be able to reach the end of declaring their praises,
even if they did so for countless boundless kalpas.
The End of Chapter Twenty-One

520

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 22
The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
At that time, Forest of Meritorious Qualities Bodhisattva again
addressed the bodhisattvas, saying:
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has ten kinds of
treasuries of which all buddhas of the past, future, and present have
spoken, will speak, and do now speak. What then are those ten?
They are:
The treasury of faith;
The treasury of moral precepts;
The treasury of a sense of shame;
The treasury of a dread of blame;
The treasury of learning;
The treasury of giving;
The treasury of wisdom;
The treasury of recollection;
The treasury of retention; and
The treasury of eloquence.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s “treasury of faith”? This bodhisattva has
the following kinds of faith:
Faith that all dharmas are empty;
Faith that all dharmas are signless;
Faith that all dharmas are wishless;
Faith that all dharmas are uncreated;
Faith that all dharmas have no basis for discriminations;
Faith that all dharmas are baseless;
Faith that all dharmas are measureless;
Faith that all dharmas are insuperable;
Faith that all dharmas are difficult to transcend; and
Faith that all dharmas are unproduced.
If the bodhisattva is able to accord with all dharmas in these ways,
then, having produced pure faith:
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of the Dharma of the
Buddha, his mind is not intimidated;

522

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of all buddhas, his
mind is not intimidated;
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of the realms of beings,
his mind is not intimidated;
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of the Dharma realm,
his mind is not intimidated;
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of the realm of empty
space, his mind is not intimidated;
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of the realm of nirvāṇa,
his mind is not intimidated;
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of past time, his mind
is not intimidated;
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of future time, his mind
is not intimidated;
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of the present time, his
mind is not intimidated; and
Whenever he hears of the inconceivability of the entry into all kal­
pas, his mind is not intimidated.
And why is this? This bodhisattva all along maintains solid
faith in the buddhas, knowing that the wisdom of the Buddha is
boundless and endless, knowing that in every one of the countless
worlds throughout the ten directions there are countless buddhas
who have realized, now realize, and will realize anuttara-samyak-
saṃbodhi, have already appeared in the world, now appear in the
world, and will appear in the world, and have entered nirvāṇa, now
enter nirvāṇa, and will enter nirvāṇa. So, too, he knows that the
wisdom of the buddhas is neither increased nor decreased, is nei­
ther produced nor destroyed, is neither advancing nor receding, is
neither near nor far, and is neither to be known nor relinquished.
This bodhisattva enters the wisdom of the Buddha and devel­
ops boundless and inexhaustible faith. Having acquired this faith,
his resolve becomes irreversible. His mind does not become mixed
up or disordered, cannot be harmed, is free of defiling attachment,
always has a foundation, accords with the āryas, abides in the house
of the tathāgatas, guards and preserves the lineage of all buddhas,
increases the resolute faith of all bodhisattvas, accords with the
roots of goodness of all tathāgatas, and produces the skillful means of
all buddhas. This is what is meant by the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
treasury of faith. If the bodhisattva abides in this treasury of faith,
he is then able to hear and retain all dharmas of the Buddha, teach
them for beings, and enable them all to awaken.

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
523
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s “treasury of moral precepts”? This bodhisattva per­
fects:
The moral precept of universal benefit;
The moral precept of not taking on [wrong] prohibitions;
The moral precept of not dwelling;
The moral precept of having no regrets;
The moral precept of noncontentiousness;
The moral precept of nonharming;
The moral precept of nondefilement;
The moral precept of noncovetousness;
The moral precept of faultlessness; and
The moral precept of nontransgression.
What is meant by the moral precept of universal benefit? This bod­
hisattva’s taking on and upholding pure precepts is originally done
for the purpose of benefiting all beings.
What is meant by the moral precept of not taking on [wrong]
prohibitions? This bodhisattva does not take on the practice of any
of the prohibitions of non-Buddhist traditions. Rather, he is natu­
rally vigorous in upholding only the same pure precepts as those
observed by all buddhas, the tathāgatas, of the three periods of time.
What is meant by the moral precept of not dwelling? When this
bodhisattva takes on and upholds the moral precepts, his mind does
not dwell in the desire realm, does not dwell in the form realm, and
does not dwell in the formless realm. Why? It is not for the purpose
of seeking to be reborn there that he upholds the moral precepts.
What is meant by the moral precept of having no regrets? This
bodhisattva always succeeds in dwelling peacefully with a mind
free of regrets. And how is this so? This is because he does not com­
mit grave karmic offenses, does not engage in flattery and decep­
tion, and does not break the pure moral precepts.
What is meant by the moral precept of noncontentiousness? This
bodhisattva does not regard previously established regulations as
wrong and does not establish additional ones. His mind always
accords with the moral precepts leading toward nirvāṇa, com­
pletely fulfills their observance, and remains free of any violations.
He does not use his upholding of moral precepts to torment other
beings, thereby causing them to experience suffering. Rather, it is
solely with the wish that everyone always be happy that he upholds
the moral precepts.

524

The Flower Adornment Sutra
What is meant by the moral precept of nonharming? This bod­
hisattva does not, because of the moral precepts, train in incan­
tational skills and the formulation of medicinal potions with the
intention of harming beings. Rather, it is solely for the sake of res­
cuing and protecting all beings that he upholds the moral precepts.
What is meant by the moral precept of nondefilement? This bod­
hisattva does not become attached to extreme views and does not
observe impure precepts. Rather, he only contemplates conditioned
arising as he upholds the moral precepts leading to emancipation.
What is meant by the moral precept of noncovetousness? This
bodhisattva does not display any sort of extraordinary appearance
to make a show of his own special qualities, but rather only upholds
the moral precepts for the purpose of completely fulfilling the dhar­
mas leading to emancipation.
What is meant by the moral precept of remaining free of faults?
This bodhisattva does not arrogantly proclaim, “I observe the
moral precepts” and, whenever he sees those who break the pre­
cepts, he refrains from slighting or deprecating them to make them
feel ashamed. Rather, he makes himself become single-minded in
upholding the moral precepts.
What is meant by the moral precept of nontransgression? This
bodhisattva forever cuts off killing, stealing, sexual misconduct,
false speech, divisive speech, abusive speech, meaningless speech,
covetousness, ill will, and wrong views. He completely fulfills
the observance of the ten kinds of good karmic deeds. When this
bodhisattva upholds this moral precept of non-transgression, he
reflects, “When any being violates the pure precepts, this always
arises from inverted views. It is only the Buddha, the Bhagavat, who
is able to know due to which causes and conditions beings adopt
inverted views and then violate the pure precepts. I should real­
ize the unsurpassed bodhi and then extensively explain the true
Dharma for beings in order to enable them to abandon inverted
views.”
This is what is meant by the second of the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasuries, the treasury of moral precepts.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of a sense of shame? This bodhisattva recalls
all the past evil deeds he has committed and then arouses a sense of
shame. That is to say, that bodhisattva thinks to himself as follows:
Throughout the beginningless past on up to the present, I have
mutually served with all other beings in the roles of father,
mother, elder brother, younger brother, elder sister, younger

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
525
sister, son, and daughter, during which time, due to being full of
greed, hatred, delusion, arrogance, pride, flattery, deception, and
all the other types of afflictions, we have harmed one another,
have taken turns in attacking and robbing one another, and have
raped, injured, and killed one another, having no sort of evil deed
that we have not committed. All other beings have also acted in
this way whereby, because of the afflictions, they have engaged in
full measure in the many sorts of evil deeds.
Therefore we have each failed to respect the other, have each
failed to esteem the other, have each failed to obey the other, have
each failed to defer to the other, have each failed to inspire and
guide the other, have each failed to protect and cherish the other,
have each killed the other, and have each been the enemy of the
other.
As I reflect upon my own and other beings’ past, future, and
present actions devoid of any sense of shame, I realize that, of all
the buddhas of the three periods of time, there are none of them
who do not know of and see this. If I now fail to cut off shameless
actions such as these, then the buddhas of the three periods of
time shall observe this in me. How then could I simply continue
on in this way and fail to bring this to a halt? This would be utterly
unthinkable.
Therefore, I should focus my mind on cutting off such behav­
ior, on realizing anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi, and on extensively
explaining the true Dharma for beings.
This is what is meant by the third of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
treasuries, the treasury of a sense of shame.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of a dread of blame? This bodhisattva feels a
dread of blame for all the past instances in which, due to insatiable
craving for the objects of the five desires, he increasingly engaged in
greed, hatred, delusion, and the other afflictions. He then thinks, “I
should now refrain from any further engagement in these endeav­
ors.” He also has this thought:
Beings, devoid of wisdom, give rise to all the afflictions and fully
engage in all the evil dharmas, failing to be mutually respectful,
failing to esteem one another, and so forth, even to the point that
they become increasingly more bitter enemies of each other and
have none of the evils such as these that they do not abundantly
commit. Then, having committed them, they feel delight in hav­
ing done so and seek to be praised for such acts. Being blind with­
out the eye of wisdom, they have had nothing they know or see.

526

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Having entered the womb in their mother’s belly, they have
taken birth, grown into a defiled body, and then finally arrive
at the point where they have white hair and a wrinkled counte­
nance. In contemplating this circumstance, those with wisdom
observe that this is a matter involving impure dharmas arising
solely because of sexual desire.
This is something that all buddhas of the three periods of
time all know and see. If I were to now continue practicing such
endeavors, then that would be to cheat and deceive all buddhas
of the three periods of time. Therefore, I should cultivate a dread
of blame, swiftly attain anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi, and then exten­
sively explain the true Dharma for beings.
This is what is meant by the fourth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
treasuries, the treasury of a dread of blame.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of learning? This bodhisattva knows:
Because this circumstance exists, this other circumstance exists;
Because this circumstance does not exist, this other circumstance
does not exist;
Because this circumstance arises, this other circumstance will
arise;
Because this circumstance ceases, this other circumstance ceases;
This is a worldly dharma;
This is a world-transcending dharma;
This is a conditioned dharma;
This is an unconditioned dharma;
This is a morally determinate dharma; and
This is a morally indeterminate dharma.
What is meant by, “Because this circumstance exists, this other cir­
cumstance exists”? It means that it is because ignorance exists that
actions exist.
What is meant by, “Because this circumstance does not exist, this
other circumstance does not exist”? It means that it is because con­
sciousness does not exist that name-and-form do not exist.
What is meant by, “Because this circumstance arises, this other
circumstance will arise”? It means that it is because of the arising of
craving that suffering arises.
What is meant by, “Because this circumstance ceases, this other
circumstance ceases”? It means that it is due to the cessation of
becoming that birth ceases.

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
527
What are “worldly dharmas”? They are form, feeling, percep­
tion, karmic formative factors, and consciousness.
What are “world-transcending dharmas”? They are moral pre­
cepts, meditative concentration, wisdom, liberation, and the knowl­
edge and vision of liberation.
What are “conditioned dharmas”? They are the desire realm, the
form realm, the formless realm, and the realms of beings.
What are “unconditioned dharmas”? They are empty space,
nirvāṇa, cessation accomplished through analysis of objective
conditions,322 cessation not accomplished through analysis of objec­
tive conditions,323 conditioned arising, and the abiding nature of
dharmas.324
What is meant by “morally determinate dharmas”? They are the
four truths of the āryas, the four fruits of the śramaṇa, the four kinds
of eloquence,325 the four fearlessnesses, the four stations of mindful­
ness, the four right efforts, the four foundations of psychic power,
the five roots, the five powers, the seven enlightenment factors, and
the eightfold path of the āryas.326
What is meant by “morally indeterminate dharmas”? They are:
Whether the world is bounded, unbounded, both bounded and
unbounded, or neither bounded nor unbounded;
Whether the world is eternal, non-eternal, both eternal and non-
eternal, or neither eternal nor non-eternal;
Whether the Tathāgata exists after nirvāṇa, does not exist after
nirvāṇa, both exists and does not exist after nirvāṇa, or neither
exists nor does not exist after nirvāṇa;
Whether the self and beings exist, do not exist, both exist and do
not exist, or neither exist nor do not exist;
How many tathāgatas entered parinirvāṇa in the past;
How many śrāvaka disciples and pratyekabuddhas entered
parinirvāṇa [in the past];
How many tathāgatas, how many śrāvaka disciples and pratyeka­
buddhas, and how many beings there will be in the future;
How many tathāgatas, how many śrāvaka disciples and pratyeka­
buddhas, and how many beings now abide in the present;
Who the first tathāgata was to ever come forth into the world;
Which śrāvaka disciples and pratyekabuddhas were the very first to
come forth into the world;
Which beings were the very first to come forth into existence;
Which of the tathāgatas will be the very last to come forth into the
world;

528

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Which of the śrāvaka disciples and which of the pratyekabuddhas
will be the very last to come forth into the world;
Which beings will be the very last to come forth;
Which dharma was the very first;
Which dharma will be the very last;
Where the world came from and where it will go;
How many worlds are created and how many are destroyed;
Where do worlds come from and where do they go;
When was the very beginning of saṃsāra;
What will constitute the very end of saṃsāra.
This is what is meant by “morally indeterminate dharmas.” The
bodhisattva-mahāsattva thinks in this way: “Of all of the beings
in the midst of saṃsāra, none of them has extensive learning. They
are unable to completely know all these dharmas. I should resolve
to retain the treasury of abundant learning, attain anuttara-samyak-
saṃbodhi, and explain the true Dharma for beings.” This is what is
meant by the fifth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s treasuries, the
treasury of extensive learning.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of giving? This bodhisattva practices ten
kinds of giving, namely: shared giving, exhaustive giving, inward
giving, outward giving, inward and outward giving, all-inclusive
giving, past giving,327 future giving, present giving, and ultimate
giving.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by shared giving? This bod­
hisattva’s natural disposition is inclined toward humanity, kind­
ness, and the enjoyment of kindly giving. If he obtains delectably
flavored foods, he does not take them exclusively for himself but
rather sees it as essential to give to other beings and then only
afterwards does he allow himself to eat. No matter what things he
receives, he deals with them in this same way.
When he does go ahead and eat, he has this thought: “My body
is full of eighty thousand sorts of microbes, all of which depend
on me to remain alive. If my body is full and happy, then they too
are full and happy. If my own body is suffering from hunger, then
theirs are also suffering from hunger. Through my acceptance of all
this drink and food, may it be that all beings are all able to become
full.” Then, when he goes ahead and eats it himself for the sake of
feeding them, he does not feel greed for its flavors.
He then has this additional thought: “Throughout the long night
of existence, I have been fondly attached to my own body and, wish­
ing to enable it to become full, I have then accepted drink and food.

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
529
By my now taking this food and making a kindly gift of it to beings,
may I forever cut off all craving and attachment for the body.” This
is what is meant by shared giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s exhaustive giving? Sons of
the Buddha, supposing that this bodhisattva acquires all sorts of
different fine-flavored drinks and food, incense, flowers, robes,
and other such things to sustain his life, if he then goes ahead and
uses them for himself, he thereby acquires happiness and length­
ened life. If he stops himself from doing so and instead gives those
things to other people, then he becomes poor, endures sufferings,
and experiences premature death.
It could be that at some time some person comes along and says
to him, “You should now give me everything you own.” The bod­
hisattva might then think to himself: “From the beginningless past
up to the present day, I have buried countless bodies due to hunger
and starvation. It has never happened that I have given up so much
as the point of a hair to benefit other beings so that I might then
acquire the fine benefit from having done so. Now, as in the past,
I am again bound to relinquish this life. Therefore, for the sake of
benefiting beings, I should now relinquish everything without res­
ervation, even if by doing so, it brings this life to an end.” This is
what is meant by exhaustive giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s inward giving? Sons of the
Buddha, suppose that this bodhisattva had just come into the flour­
ishing of his youth, was physically well-developed, was of fine
appearance, and had a body adorned by scents, flowers, and robes.
Suppose too he had just received the anointing of the crown con­
secration by which he ascended to the station of the wheel-turning
king, was abundantly endowed with the seven treasures, and ruled
over the four continents. Suppose then that some person then came
along and addressed this king, saying:
O Great King, you should realize that I have now encountered
the deterioration of old age and have a body beset with grave dis­
ease. I am solitary, emaciated, faltering, and faced with the immi­
nent arrival of death. Still, if I was simply able to obtain from the
King’s body his hands, feet, blood, flesh, head, eyes, bones, and
marrow, then I would certainly have the hope of survival. I only
wish, O Great King, that you would not think further on it with
any regretful self cherishing, but rather would see your way to a
kindly mindfulness of my plight and then bestow these gifts on
me.

530

The Flower Adornment Sutra
At that time, the bodhisattva would think in this way: “In due
course, this body of mine will certainly die without having pro­
vided even a single benefit. It is only fitting then that I would swiftly
renounce it to save a living being.” Having reflected thus, he would
then go ahead and provide these gifts to him, doing so with a mind
free of regrets. This is what is meant by inward giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s outward giving? Sons of the
Buddha, suppose that this bodhisattva was in the flourishing of his
years, was possessed of a fine-looking physical appearance complete
with the many signs, had fine flowers and the best robes as physi­
cal adornments, and had just received the anointing of the crown
consecration to the royal station of a wheel-turning king who was
well-endowed with the seven treasures and who ruled over the four
continents. Suppose then that some man came along and addressed
the king, saying, “I am now poverty-stricken and beset by many
kinds of suffering. I only wish that the Humane and Kindly One
might be especially moved to feel pity for me, relinquish the royal
throne, and bestow it on me so that I might become the ruler who
enjoys the sovereign’s wealth and happiness.”
At that time, the bodhisattva would think, “All honor and
prosperity are definitely bound to diminish and come to an end.
Once they have diminished and come to an end, I will be unable
to bestow any further benefit on beings. It is only fitting then that I
would now go along with what he seeks by completely fulfilling his
wishes.” Having thought in this way, he would then straightaway
bestow that gift on him, feeling no regrets. This is what is meant by
outward giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s inward and outward giv­
ing? Sons of the Buddha, suppose that this bodhisattva was, as
described above, abiding on the wheel-turning king’s throne, well-
endowed with the seven treasures and ruling over the four con­
tinents, whereupon some person then came along and addressed
him, saying, “The King has already dwelt for a long time in this
position of the wheel-turning king. However, I have not yet had the
opportunity to acquire it. I only wish that the Great King might
relinquish it to me while also becoming my minister or servant.”
At that time, the bodhisattva would have this thought: “My
body, wealth, jewels, and royal position are all impermanent dhar­
mas bound for ruination and destruction. Now, I am enjoying the
flourishing of my strength in which my wealth includes this entire
continent. When a supplicant appears, I should use what is not sol­
idly enduring to seek the solidly enduring Dharma.”

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
531
Having thought in this way, he would then immediately relin­
quish it, even going so far as to turn himself into a diligent servant
without any thought of regret. This is what is meant by inward and
outward giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s all-inclusive giving? Sons
of the Buddha, suppose that this bodhisattva is again as described
above, dwelling in the position of a wheel-turning king well-
endowed with the seven treasures and ruling over the four con­
tinents, whereupon countless poverty-stricken people come before
him and say, “The Great King’s fame pervades the ten directions. It
is out of admiration for him that we have now come here. We each
now have requests and hope that he will let his kindness fall on all
of us so that we may be fully satisfied.”
Suppose then that, of all those poor people, some sought that
great king’s country, some sought his wives and sons, and some
sought his hands, feet, blood, flesh, heart, lungs, head, eyes, mar­
row, and brain. At this time, the bodhisattva would think in this
way: “Everything for which I feel kindness and affection is bound
to separate and depart, and yet, when that occurs, there still will
have been no benefit for beings. Now, wishing to forever renounce
desire, I shall use all these things which are bound to depart and
scatter to fulfill the wishes of these beings.”
Having had this thought, he would then go ahead and give away
all these things without any thoughts of regret and also without
any feelings of disgust or disdain for those beings. This is what is
meant by all-inclusive giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s past giving? When this bod­
hisattva hears of all the meritorious qualities of all buddhas and
bodhisattvas of the past, having heard of them, he does not become
attached to them, completely understands that they are non-exis­
tent, does not bring forth any discriminations about them, does
not covet them, does not savor them, and does not seek to seize
on them. He has nothing on which he relies, and sees dharmas as
like a dream and as devoid of any enduring solidity. He does not
conceive of the existence of any roots of goodness and also does not
rely on them. Rather, he solely devotes himself to the teaching of
beings caught in grasping and attachment so that they may become
ripened in the Buddha’s Dharma and so he expounds on it for their
benefit.
He also contemplates in this way: “Even if one were to search for
all dharmas of the past throughout the ten directions, one would
still find that none of them can be apprehended.” Having reflected

532

The Flower Adornment Sutra
in this way, he then finally relinquishes all dharmas of the past.
This is what is meant by past giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s future giving? On hearing of
all the cultivation undertaken by those who will become the bud­
dhas of the future, this bodhisattva completely understands them
to be non-existent, refrains from seizing on any of their signs, does
not especially delight in taking rebirth in any of their buddha lands,
does not savor them, and does not become attached to them, yet
he does not become weary of them, either. He does not dedicate
roots of goodness to them nor does he withdraw any roots of good­
ness from them, either. Rather he remains constant and diligent in
his cultivation, never allowing it to diminish or cease. He wishes
only, because of those realms, to attract beings, explain the truth
for them, and thus enable them to become ripened in the Buddha’s
Dharma.
As for these dharmas, they neither do nor do not have any loca­
tion. They are neither inward nor outward and neither near nor far.
He also has this thought: “If these dharmas are nonexistent, then
one cannot fail to relinquish them.” This is what is meant by future
giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s present giving? When this
bodhisattva hears of the perfectly fulfilled merit of the devas
in the Four Heavenly Kings Heaven, the Heaven of the Thirty-
Three, the Yama Heaven, the Tuṣita Heaven, the Transformation
of Bliss Heaven, the Free Appropriation of Others’ Bliss Heaven,
the Brahma Heavens, including the Brahma-kāyika Heaven, the
Brahma-purohita Heaven, the Brahma-pāriṣadya Heaven, and the
Great Brahma Heaven, the Radiance Heavens, including the Lesser
Light Heaven, the Limitless Light Heaven, and the Light-and-Sound
Heaven, the Purity Heavens, including the Lesser Purity Heaven,
the Limitless Purity Heaven, and the Pervasive Purity Heaven,
the Vastness Heavens, including the Lesser Vastness Heaven, the
Limitless Vastness Heaven, and the Vast Fruition Heaven, and the
Trouble-Free Heaven, the Heat-Free Heaven, the Fine Vision Heaven,
the Fine Manifestation Heaven, and the Ultimate Form Heaven, and
also [when he hears of the perfectly fulfilled merit] of the śrāvaka
disciples and the pratyekabuddhas, having heard of all this, his mind
does not become confused, does not become depressed, does not
become especially focused on it, and does not become scattered
because of it. Rather, he simply contemplates all actions as being as
unreal as a dream and thus remains free of any sort of covetousness
for it or attachment to it. In order to enable beings to abandon the

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
533
wretched destinies, his mind remains free of any discriminations
as he cultivates the bodhisattva path, perfects the dharmas of bud­
dhahood, and expounds on them for the sake of those beings. This
is what is meant by present giving.
What is meant by the bodhisattva’s ultimate giving? Sons of
the Buddha, suppose that this bodhisattva were confronted with
the arrival to his abode of countless beings, some of whom had
no eyes, some of whom had no ears, some of whom had no noses,
or no tongues, or no hands, or no feet, all of whom then said to
the bodhisattva, “We have only a scant amount of merit and thus
have defective and deficient sense faculties. We only wish that the
Worthy and Kind One will invoke a skillful expedient by which he
relinquishes what he possesses and thus enables us to become com­
pletely endowed with them.”
On hearing this, the bodhisattva would then give up these things
to them. Even if, because of this, he had to go through asaṃkhyeyas
of kalpas with incomplete sense faculties, his mind would still not
have so much as a single thought of regret.
Rather, he would only contemplate this body as something
which, from the moment of first entering the womb as an impure
and minute form which developed its faculties in the belly, is subject
to birth, aging, sickness, and death. He would also contemplate this
body as unreal, as [the basis for] failing to have a sense of shame or
dread of blame, as something that is not [regarded as] a possession
by the worthies or āryas, as foul-smelling, defiled, and unclean, as
held together by bones and joints pasted over with blood and flesh,
as always leaking from the nine apertures, and as something a per­
son might well view as disgusting and worthy of disdain. Having
engaged in this contemplation, he would not have any thoughts of
fondness for it or attachment to it.
He would then also have this thought: “This body is frag­
ile, devoid of any enduring substantiality. How then could I now
cherish any kind of affectionate attachment for it? I should rather
give it up to others and thus fulfill their wishes. By this deed, I
am providing guidance to beings to enable them to refrain from
developing any affection for the body or mind so that they might
all become able to develop the pure wisdom body.” This is what is
meant by ultimate giving. This is what is meant by the sixth of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s treasuries, the treasury of giving.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of wisdom? This bodhisattva knows form
in accordance with reality, knows the accumulation of form in

534

The Flower Adornment Sutra
accordance with reality, knows the cessation of form in accordance
with reality, and knows the path to the cessation of form in accor­
dance with reality.
He knows feelings, perceptions, karmic formative factors, and
consciousness in accordance with reality, knows the accumulation
of feelings, perceptions, karmic formative factors, and conscious­
ness in accordance with reality, knows the cessation of feelings,
perceptions, karmic formative factors, and consciousness in accor­
dance with reality, and knows the path to the cessation of feelings,
perceptions, karmic formative factors, and consciousness in accor­
dance with reality.
He knows ignorance in accordance with reality, knows the accu­
mulation of ignorance in accordance with reality, knows the cessa­
tion of ignorance in accordance with reality, and knows the path to
the cessation of ignorance in accordance with reality.
He knows craving in accordance with reality, knows the accu­
mulation of craving in accordance with reality, knows the cessation
of craving in accordance with reality, and knows the path to the
cessation of craving in accordance with reality.
He knows śrāvaka disciples in accordance with reality, knows the
dharmas of śrāvaka disciples in accordance with reality, knows the
accumulation of śrāvaka disciples in accordance with reality, and
knows the nirvāṇa of śrāvaka disciples in accordance with reality.
He knows pratyekabuddhas in accordance with reality, knows the
dharmas of pratyekabuddhas in accordance with reality, knows the
accumulation of pratyekabuddhas in accordance with reality, and
knows the nirvāṇa of pratyekabuddhas in accordance with reality.
He knows bodhisattvas in accordance with reality, knows the
dharmas of bodhisattvas in accordance with reality, knows the
accumulation of bodhisattvas in accordance with reality, and knows
the nirvāṇa of bodhisattvas in accordance with reality.
How does he know these matters? He knows that whatever is
created from the causes and conditions associated with actions aris­
ing from karmic retributions is in all cases empty and false, devoid
of any reality, non-self, and insubstantial. He knows there is not
the slightest dharma that can either be apprehended or established.
Wishing to enable beings to realize their true nature, he extensively
explains these matters for them.
And what all does he explain for them? He explains the inde­
structibility of dharmas. Which dharmas are indestructible? Form
is indestructible and feelings, perceptions, karmic formative factors,
and consciousness are indestructible. Ignorance is indestructible.

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
535
The dharmas of śrāvaka disciples, the dharmas of pratyekabuddhas,
and the dharmas of bodhisattvas are indestructible.
Why is this so? It is because all dharmas have no creation, no
creative agent by which they are produced, have no verbal designa­
tions, have no place in which they abide, are not born, do not arise,
are not given, are not taken, have no movement or transformation,
and have no function.
The bodhisattva perfects just such a treasury of measure­
less wisdom as this. Using just a few expedients, he completely
understands all dharmas, naturally achieves a clear and penetrat­
ing understanding, and attains the awakening that arises without
dependence on others.
This inexhaustible treasury of wisdom has ten kinds of inex­
haustibility due to which it is said to be inexhaustible. What are
those ten? They are:
Because his extensive learning and skillful means are inexhaust­
ible;
Because his drawing near to good spiritual guides is inexhaust­
ible;
Because his skillful discernment of the meanings of statements is
inexhaustible;
Because his entry into the deep Dharma realm is inexhaustible;
Because his adornment with a single flavor of wisdom is inex­
haustible;
Because his accumulation of all forms of merit with tireless resolve
is inexhaustible;
Because his entry into the dhāraṇī gateways is inexhaustible;
Because his ability to distinguish the languages and voices of all
beings is inexhaustible;
Because his ability to cut off the doubts and delusions of all beings
is inexhaustible; and
Because his manifestation of all buddhas’ spiritual powers for
all beings to teach them, train them, and enable them to cease­
lessly cultivate is inexhaustible.
These are the ten. This is what is meant by the seventh of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s treasuries, the treasury of wisdom. Those
abiding in this treasury acquire inexhaustible wisdom with which
they are everywhere able to awaken all beings.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of recollection? This bodhisattva abandons
delusion and accomplishes the perfect fulfillment of recollection by
which he recalls one past life, two lives, and so forth on up to ten

536

The Flower Adornment Sutra
lives, a hundred lives, a thousand lives, a hundred thousand lives,
and even countless hundreds of thousands of lives.
He remembers the kalpas of establishment, the kalpas of destruc­
tion, and both the kalpas of establishment and the kalpas of destruc­
tion, remembering not just a single set of kalpas of establishment,
not just a single set of kalpas of destruction, and not just a single set
of kalpas of establishment and kalpas of destruction, but rather he
remembers a hundred kalpas, a thousand kalpas, a hundred thou­
sand koṭīs of nayutas of kalpas, and so forth on up to his recalling an
innumerable number, a measureless number, a boundless number,
an incomparable number, a numberless number, an indescribable
number, an inconceivable number, an immeasurable number, an
ineffable number, and an ineffable-ineffable number of kalpas.
He recalls the name of a single buddha and so forth on up to
his remembrance of an ineffable-ineffable number of buddhas’
names. He recalls a single buddha’s appearance in the world and
his bestowing of predictions and so forth on up to his remembrance
of an ineffable-ineffable number of buddhas’ appearances in the
world and their bestowing of predictions. He recalls a single bud­
dha’s appearance in the world and his speaking of sutras and so
forth on up to his remembrance of an ineffable-ineffable number of
buddhas’ appearances in the world and their speaking sutras.
And just as he recalls this in relation to their speaking of sutras,
so too does this hold true for his remembrance of their speaking of
the geyas, the predictions, the gāthas, the nidānas, the udānas, the pre­
vious circumstances, the previous lifetimes, the expansive teach­
ings, the unprecedented teachings, the analogies, and the doctrinal
discourses.328
He remembers a single congregation and so forth on up to his
remembrance of an ineffable-ineffable number of congregations. He
remembers the expounding of a single dharma and so forth on up to
his remembrance of an ineffable-ineffable number of dharmas. He
remembers many different sorts of natures associated with a single
faculty and so forth on up to his remembrance of countless differ­
ent sorts of natures associated with an ineffable-ineffable number of
faculties. He remembers countless different sorts of natures associ­
ated with a single faculty and so forth on up to his remembrance
of countless different sorts of natures associated with an ineffable-
ineffable number of faculties. He remembers all sorts of different
natures associated with but one of the afflictions and so forth on up
to his remembrance of all sorts of different natures associated with
an ineffable-ineffable number of afflictions. He remembers all sorts

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
537
of different natures associated with a single samādhi and so forth
on up to his remembrance of all sorts of different natures associated
with an ineffable-ineffable number of samādhis.
This recollection of his is of ten kinds. They are: quiescent recol­
lection, pure recollection, non-turbid recollection, clearly penetrat­
ing recollection, recollection of separation from sense objects, rec­
ollection of separation from many different sorts of sense objects,
recollection of separation from defilements, recollection of dazzling
radiance, recollection of the desirable, and unimpeded recollection.
When this bodhisattva abides in this recollection, nothing in the
world can disturb him and none of the heterodox sorts of doctrines
are able to cause him to waver. All of his roots of goodness from
past lives have become purified. He has no defiling attachment to
any worldly dharma. He cannot be destroyed by any of the many
sorts of māras or adherents of non-Buddhist paths. When changing
bodies and taking on rebirths, he does not forget anything at all.
Whether it be in the past, the present, or the future, he discourses
on Dharma endlessly. In all worlds, in dwelling together with other
beings, he is always free of faults. He is unimpeded in entering the
assemblies at the sites of enlightenment of all buddhas. Wherever
all buddhas dwell, he is able to draw near to them all. This is what
is meant by the eighth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s treasuries,
the treasury of recollection.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of retention? This bodhisattva retains the
sutras spoken by all buddhas, including the meanings and prin­
ciples of their texts and sentences, doing so without ever forgetting
them. He retains them for a single lifetime and so forth on up to his
retaining them for an ineffable-ineffable number of lifetimes.
He retains the name of a single buddha and so forth on up to his
retention of an ineffable-ineffable number of buddha names which
he retains for a single kalpa and so forth on up to his retaining them
for an ineffable-ineffable number of kalpas.
He is able to retain a single buddha’s bestowal of predictions and
so forth on up to his retention of an ineffable-ineffable number of
buddhas’ bestowals of predictions. He retains a single sutra and
so forth on up to his retention of an ineffable-ineffable number of
sutras. He retains the details of a single assembly and so forth on up
to his retention of the details of an ineffable number of assemblies.
He retains the discourse on a single dharma and so forth on up
to his retention of the discourses on an ineffable-ineffable num­
ber of dharmas. He retains the countless different sorts of natures

538

The Flower Adornment Sutra
associated with a single faculty and so forth on up to his retention
of the countless different sorts of natures associated with an inef­
fable-ineffable number of faculties. He retains all sorts of different
natures associated with a single affliction and so forth on up to
his retention of many different sorts of natures associated with an
ineffable-ineffable number of afflictions. He retains many different
sorts of natures associated with a single samādhi and so forth on up
to his retention of many different sorts of natures associated with
an ineffable-ineffable number of samādhis.
Sons of the Buddha, this treasury of retention is boundless, diffi­
cult to fill up, difficult to reach the bottom of, difficult to draw near
to, insurmountable, immeasurable, inexhaustible, and possessed
of great awe-inspiring power. It is a buddha’s sphere of cognition
which only a buddha is able to completely comprehend. This is
what is meant by the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s ninth treasury, the
treasury of retention.
Sons of the Buddha, what is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s treasury of eloquence? This bodhisattva possesses
deep wisdom, completely knows the true character of phenomena,
and extensively expounds on all dharmas for beings, never contra­
dicting the scriptures of the Buddha as he does so. He explains a
single kind of dharma and so forth on up to his explanation of an
ineffable-ineffable number of kinds of dharmas. He explains a sin­
gle buddha’s name and so forth on up to his explaining an ineffable-
ineffable number of buddhas’ names.
In this same way, he discourses on a single world, discourses on
a single buddha’s bestowal of predictions, discourses on a single
sutra, discourses on a single congregation, expounds on a single
dharma, discourses on countless different kinds of natures associ­
ated with a single faculty, discourses on countless different kinds of
natures associated with a single affliction, discourses on countless
different kinds of natures associated with a single samādhi, and
so forth on up to his discoursing on countless different kinds of
natures associated with an ineffable-ineffable number of samādhis.
He may discourse for a single day, may discourse for a half
month, or discourse for a whole month, or may discourse for a hun­
dred years, a thousand years, or discourse for a hundred thousand
years, or for a single kalpa, a hundred kalpas, a thousand kalpas,
or may discourse for a hundred thousand kalpas, or may discourse
for a hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of kalpas, or may discourse
for innumerably many or countlessly many kalpas and so forth on
up to his discoursing on these matters for an ineffable-ineffable

Chapter 22 — The Ten Inexhaustible Treasuries
539
number of kalpas. In doing so, though he might exhaust these num­
bers of kalpas, it would be difficult for him to ever reach the end of
the meanings and principles associated with but a single text or a
single sentence.
And why is this? This is because this bodhisattva has completely
perfected the ten inexhaustible treasuries. Having completely per­
fected these treasuries, he succeeds in having “the dhāraṇī gateway
that subsumes all dharmas” manifest directly to him, a dhāraṇī
that has a retinue of a hundred myriads of asaṃkhyeyas of dhāraṇīs.
Having acquired this dhāraṇī, he draws upon the light of Dharma to
extensively expound on the Dharma for beings. When he expounds
on the Dharma, he fills up all worlds of the ten directions with the
sublime voice issuing from the broad and long tongue. He adapts
to the faculties and natures of beings and causes them all to feel
completely satisfied so that their minds are pleased and so that
they extinguish the defilement of all the afflictions that entangle
them. He skillfully penetrates all the voices, spoken languages, and
written languages with such eloquence that he enables all beings to
carry forth the lineage of the Buddha without interruption and with
continuously pure minds as he also uses the light of Dharma to
expound on the Dharma endlessly and tirelessly. And why is this? It
is because this bodhisattva has developed the boundless body that
reaches to the very end of space and pervades the Dharma realm.
This is what is meant by the tenth of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s
treasuries, the treasury of eloquence. This treasury is inexhaustible,
undivided, non-intermittent, never cut short, unchanging, unob­
structed, irreversible, extremely profound and bottomlessly deep,
difficult to enter, and such that it enters all the gateways of the
Dharma of all buddhas.
Sons of the Buddha, these ten kinds of inexhaustible treasuries
have ten kinds of inexhaustible dharmas due to which they enable
all bodhisattvas to accomplish the ultimate realization of unsur­
passed bodhi. What are those ten? They are:
Because they benefit all beings;
Because they skillfully dedicate their original vows;
Because they persist without interruption throughout all kalpas;
Because, having awakened to everything throughout the realm of
empty space, their minds are unbounded;
Because they dedicate merit in the realm of the conditioned and
yet do not become attached;
Because they subsume endless dharmas within a single mind-
moment of their sphere of cognition;

540

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Because the resolve of their great vows remains unchanging;
Because they skillfully accumulate all dhāraṇīs;
Because they are regarded with protective mindfulness by all
buddhas; and
Because they realize all dharmas are like mere conjurations.
These are the ten kinds of inexhaustible dharmas by which they are
able to cause everything done in the world to become an ultimate
and inexhaustible great treasury.
The End of Chapter Twenty-Two

Chapter 23
The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
At that time, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, in all those worlds
throughout the ten directions, among their four continents, on the
continent of Jambudvīpa, everyone saw the Tathāgata seated beneath
the tree where there were bodhisattvas who, assisted by the Buddha’s
spiritual powers, expounded on the Dharma. There was no one there
who did not believe himself to be constantly in the direct presence of
the Buddha.
At that time, again due to his spiritual powers, without leaving
the bodhi tree, the summit of Mount Sumeru or the Suyāma Heaven
palace, the Bhagavat then went to the Tuṣita Heaven’s Palace of
Marvelous Jewel Adornments.
Then, seeing the Buddha coming from afar, the king of the Tuṣita
Heaven immediately prepared a maṇi jewel dais lion throne within
the palace. That lion throne was composed of marvelous celestial
jewels acquired as a result of past cultivation of roots of goodness
which appeared there through the spiritual powers of all tathāgatas. It
was born from countless hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of
asaṃkhyeyas of roots of goodness, was created by the pure dharmas
of all tathāgatas, and was decorated with lustrous adornments appear­
ing through the power of boundless merit and indestructible pure
karmic rewards. Those who beheld it were insatiably delighted at the
sight of it. This sort of world-transcending dharma was undefiled by
the world. Of all the beings who came and gazed upon it, none could
fathom all its wonders.
It had a hundred myriad koṭīs of tiers of steps surrounding it. It
had a hundred myriad koṭīs of nets of gold, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of floral curtains, a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled curtains, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of garland curtains, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of
incense curtains which stretched over the top of it. Flower garlands
draped down and fragrant scents everywhere permeated the air. A
hundred myriad koṭīs of floral canopies, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
garland canopies, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of jewel canopies were
held up by the devas arrayed in rows on the four sides and a hundred
myriad koṭīs of bejeweled robes were spread across the top of it.

542

The Flower Adornment Sutra
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of surrounding towers graced
with elegant shining adornments. There were a hundred myriad koṭīs
of maṇi pearl nets and a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled nets that
covered it from above. There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of jewel
necklace nets draped down on all four sides, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of adornment nets, a hundred myriad koṭīs of canopy nets, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of robe nets, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled cur­
tain nets that stretched over it from above. There were a hundred
myriad koṭīs of jeweled lotus nets blossoming with gloriously radiant
brilliance and a hundred myriad koṭīs of bejeweled incense nets, the
fragrance from which was exquisitely sublime and delightful to the
minds of the multitude.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bejeweled bell curtains
emanating harmonious and refined sounds in response to the move­
ments of their bells. There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of sandal­
wood and jewel curtains the fragrant scent from which everywhere
permeated the air. There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bejeweled
flower curtains the flowers of which blossomed radiantly, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of curtains of the many sorts of marvelously colored
robes rarely found in the world, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisat­
tva [image] curtains, a hundred myriad koṭīs of curtains of real gold, a
hundred myriad koṭīs of vaiḍūrya curtains, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
curtains of many different kinds of jewels, all of which stretched over
it from above, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of curtains of all kinds of
jewels which were adorned with immense maṇi jewels.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of flowers made of marvel­
ous jewels surrounded by lustrous adornments, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of bimba curtains329 with extraordinarily marvelous interspersed
adornments, a hundred myriad koṭīs of jewel garlands, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of incense garlands which draped down on all four sides,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of solid incense the fragrance from which
everywhere permeated the air, a hundred myriad koṭīs of necklaces
of celestial adornments, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bejeweled flower
necklaces, a hundred myriad koṭīs of necklaces made of jewels from
the finest treasuries, a hundred myriad koṭīs of maṇī jewel necklaces,
and a hundred myriad koṭīs of necklaces made from the ocean’s maṇī
jewels, all of which served as adornments for the body of the throne.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of marvelous jeweled silks
formed into hanging belt decorations, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
Indra vajra jewels, a hundred myriad koṭīs of magical330 maṇi jewels,

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
543
and a hundred myriad koṭīs of marvelously colored treasuries of real
gold as interspersed adornments. There were a hundred myriad koṭīs
of vairocana maṇi jewels and a hundred myriad koṭīs of Indra maṇi
jewels shining with dazzling radiance.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of celestial solid maṇi jewels
forming windows, a hundred myriad koṭīs of pure merit maṇi jew­
els displaying marvelous colors, a hundred myriad koṭīs of pure jew­
els from marvelous treasuries forming gateways, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of the world’s finest half-moon jewels, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of stainless treasury maṇi jewels, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of lion-
face maṇi jewels forming interspersed adornments.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of wish-fulfilling mind-king maṇi jew­
els, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Jambū River maṇi jewels, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of pure core maṇi jewels, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of
imperial banner maṇi jewels all emanated light which shone over it
from above. A hundred myriad koṭīs of white silver core maṇi jewels
and a hundred myriad koṭīs of sumeru banner maṇi jewels adorned its
lotus dais.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of real pearl necklaces, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of vaiḍūrya necklaces, a hundred myriad koṭīs of red jewel neck­
laces, a hundred myriad koṭīs of maṇi jewel necklaces, a hundred myr­
iad koṭīs of jewel-light necklaces, a hundred myriad koṭīs of necklaces
made from maṇi jewels containing many different kinds of cores, a
hundred myriad koṭīs of real red pearl necklaces extremely pleasing
to the observer, a hundred myriad koṭīs of necklaces made from maṇi
jewels with cores of boundlessly many different forms and appear­
ances, a hundred myriad koṭīs of necklaces made from ultimately and
peerlessly pure maṇi jewels, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of supremely
radiant maṇi jewel necklaces were draped down all around as adorn­
ments. There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of maṇi jewel bodied
adornments of extraordinary wondrousness.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of marvelously colored Indra
jewels, a hundred myriad koṭīs of black sandalwood incense, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of incense from inconceivable realms, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of marvelous incense from throughout the ten direc­
tions, a hundred myriad koṭīs of the most supreme sorts of incense,
and a hundred myriad koṭīs of extremely delightful incense all releas­
ing their fragrant scents everywhere throughout the ten directions.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of vimbara incense331 spread everywhere
throughout the ten directions, a hundred myriad koṭīs of pure light

544

The Flower Adornment Sutra
incense everywhere perfumed beings with their scents, and a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of incense of a boundless range of colors spread
everywhere throughout all buddha lands, never to fade away. A hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of perfume incense, a hundred myriad koṭīs of per­
meating incense, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of burning incense sent
their fragrant vapors everywhere about, perfuming everything.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of lotus-pod agarwood incense
emanating loud sounds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of miraculous332 fra­
grances able to transform the minds of the multitudes, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of aruṇa incense with universally pervasive scents
which had an exquisitely sweet aroma, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of
incense able to provoke awakening that pervaded all places, enabling
all who smelled them to have all their faculties brought to a state of
quiescence. In addition, there were a hundred myriad koṭīs of incom­
parable sovereign fragrance incense which contributed their many
different kinds of adornments to the atmosphere.
There were clouds raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heav­
enly flowers, clouds raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heav­
enly fragrances, clouds raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heav­
enly powdered incense, clouds raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs
of heavenly kusuma flowers, clouds raining down a hundred myriad
koṭīs of heavenly padma flowers, clouds raining down a hundred myr­
iad koṭīs of heavenly utpala flowers, clouds raining down a hundred
myriad koṭīs of heavenly kumuda flowers, clouds raining down a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of heavenly puṇḍarīka flowers, clouds raining down
a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly mandārava flowers, clouds raining
down a hundred myriad koṭīs of every type of heavenly flower, clouds
raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly raiment, clouds
raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of maṇi jewels, clouds raining
down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly canopies, clouds raining
down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly pennants, clouds raining
down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly crowns, clouds raining
down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly adornments, clouds rain­
ing down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly jewel garlands, clouds
raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly jewel necklaces,
clouds raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly sandalwood
incense clouds, and clouds raining down a hundred myriad koṭīs of
heavenly agarwood incense.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled banners were erected, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of jeweled pennants were suspended, a hundred

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
545
myriad koṭīs of jeweled silken belt streamers were hung, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of incense burners were lit, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
jeweled garlands were spread about, a hundred myriad koṭīs of jew­
eled fans were held, a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled whisks were
raised, a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled bell nets were suspended,
emanating marvelous sounds with the movement of a gentle breeze,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled balustrades completely encircled
the area, a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled tāla trees were arranged
in sequential rows, a hundred myriad koṭīs of marvelously bejeweled
windows were embellished with beautiful adornments, and a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of jeweled trees encircled the area, draping down
their shade.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of connected jeweled towers stretched
along in a display of magnificent continuous adornment. There were
a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled gateways draped with necklaces.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of gold bells rang forth wondrous sounds.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of jewel necklaces marked with the emblem
of auspiciousness draped down in pristine adornment. There were
a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled svastikas able to dispel the many
kinds of evil.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of gold-filled treasuries woven
of gold thread, a hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled canopies strung
along in rows on poles made of jewels. There were a hundred myr­
iad koṭīs of nets decorated with all kinds of jewels which were inter­
spersed there as adornments.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of radiant jewels emanating all
different kinds of light, a hundred myriad koṭīs of light rays emitting
dazzling illumination everywhere, a hundred myriad koṭīs of solar-
core spheres and a hundred myriad koṭīs of lunar-core spheres, both
of which were composed of jewels of countless colors.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of fragrant flames producing
reflected and interpenetrating light and a hundred myriad koṭīs of
lotus flower seedpods blooming with fresh and luxuriant flowers.
A hundred myriad koṭīs of jeweled nets, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
flower nets, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of incense nets stretched
over and covered the area from above.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bejeweled celestial robes,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of blue celestial robes, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of yellow celestial robes, a hundred myriad koṭīs of red celestial
robes, a hundred myriad koṭīs of exotically and marvelously colored

546

The Flower Adornment Sutra
celestial robes, a hundred myriad koṭīs of celestial robes adorned
with all kinds of exotic and marvelous jewels, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of perfumed robes, a hundred myriad koṭīs of robes made from all
different kinds of jewels, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of fresh white
robes, all of which were skillfully spread about in ways that delighted
whoever saw them.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly bell banners and a
hundred myriad koṭīs of gold net banners emanating subtle and mar­
velous sounds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly silk embroidery
banners replete with the many different colors, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of perfumed banners draping perfumed nets, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of flower banners raining down all kinds of flowers, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of heavenly raiment banners hung with wondrous robes,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly maṇi jewel banners adorned with
many kinds of jewels, a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly adornment
banners interspersed with many decorative elements, and a hundred
myriad koṭīs of heavenly garland banners with all kinds of different
flower garlands hanging down on all four sides.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly canopies and ban­
ners with jeweled bells ringing harmoniously in ways causing all lis­
teners to feel delighted, a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly conches
sending forth marvelous sounds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly
drums resounding loudly, a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly harps
making subtle and wondrous sounds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
heavenly mardalas333 making loud and marvelous sounds, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of various kinds of heavenly music which all played
simultaneously, a hundred myriad koṭīs of spontaneous heavenly
music creating wondrous sounds everywhere pervading all the bud­
dha kṣetras, a hundred myriad koṭīs of transformationally produced
heavenly music, the sounds from which were like echoes resounding
everywhere, a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly drums emanating
marvelous sounds when struck, a hundred myriad koṭīs of kinds of
heavenly music which accorded with the mind in their spontaneous
emanation of harmonies of sound and rhythm, and a hundred myr­
iad koṭīs of various forms of heavenly music which extinguished all
afflictions.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of mind-pleasing sounds prais­
ing offerings, a hundred myriad koṭīs of far-reaching sounds praising
service, a hundred myriad koṭīs of extremely deep sounds praising
cultivation, a hundred myriad koṭīs of manifold marvelous sounds

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
547
praising the fruits of the Buddha’s deeds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
subtle sounds praising principles accordant with reality, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of unimpeded genuine sounds praising the Buddha’s
original practices, a hundred myriad koṭīs of pure sounds praising
past offerings to all buddhas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of the sounds of
Dharma gateways praising all buddhas’ supreme fearlessness, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of limitless sounds praising the endless meritori­
ous qualities of the bodhisattvas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of sounds of
the bodhisattva grounds praising instruction in the practices related
to the bodhisattva grounds, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of uninter­
rupted sounds praising the endlessness of the Buddha’s meritorious
qualities.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of adaptive sounds which
praised and commended the practices leading to seeing the bud­
dhas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of sounds speaking of extremely pro­
found dharmas and praising the principles related to the unimpeded
knowledge of all dharmas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of far-reaching
sounds which filled up all the buddha kṣetras, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of sounds of unimpeded purity which adapted to beings’ mental dis­
positions and caused them all to feel delighted, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of sounds speaking of not dwelling within the three realms of
existence which enabled the listeners to deeply penetrate the nature
of dharmas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of joyous sounds which enabled
the minds of the listeners to become unimpeded in developing deep
faith and reverence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of sounds speaking of
the Buddha’s sphere of cognition which, no matter which sounds
they uttered, they were all able to reveal the meanings of all dhar­
mas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of dhāraṇī sounds which skillfully pro­
claimed with decisive understanding the distinctions in all sentences
of Dharma contained in the Tathāgata’s treasuries of secret teachings,
and a hundred myriad koṭīs of sounds of all dharmas that were gen­
tle, pleasant, and in harmony with the sounds of the many kinds of
music.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas at the station
of first arousing their resolve who, on seeing this throne, doubly
increased their resolve to attain all-knowledge, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of bodhisattvas cultivating the grounds whose minds became
purified and joyous, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas cultivat­
ing the practices whose awakened understanding became purified,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas at the station of noble birth

548

The Flower Adornment Sutra
who thereby dwelt in supreme aspiration, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
bodhisattvas with perfectly fulfilled skillful means who initiated the
Great Vehicle practices, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas at
the station of right resolve who then diligently cultivated the path of
all bodhisattvas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of irreversible bodhisattvas
who cultivated all the bodhisattva grounds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
bodhisattvas at the station of the chaste youth who acquired the light
of all bodhisattvas’ samādhis, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisat­
tvas at the station of the Dharma prince who penetrated the incon­
ceivable spheres of cognition of all buddhas, and a hundred myriad
koṭīs of bodhisattvas at the station of the anointing of the crown who
became able to manifest the ten limitless powers of the Tathāgata.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who acquired
sovereign mastery in the spiritual superknowledges, a hundred myr­
iad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who developed pure understanding, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas whose minds became filled with
delight, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas whose minds devel­
oped indestructibly deep faith, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisatt­
vas whose strength became vast, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisatt­
vas whose renown increased, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas
who, when they expounded on the meaning of the Dharma, it enabled
wisdom to become definite, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas
whose right mindfulness became undistracted, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of bodhisattvas who developed definite wisdom, and a hundred
myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who acquired the power of retaining
what is heard with which they retained all dharmas of the Buddha.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who produced
measurelessly vast enlightened understanding, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of bodhisattvas who became established in the faculty of faith, a
hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who, having achieved the dāna
pāramitā, were able to give everything, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bod­
hisattvas who, having achieved the śīla pāramitā, completely observed
the many moral precepts, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas
who, having achieved the patience pāramitā, their minds made no
erroneous movements and they were able to patiently acquiesce in
all dharmas of the Buddha, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas
who, having achieved the vigor pāramitā, were able to practice the
measureless vigor leading to emancipation, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of bodhisattvas who, having achieved the dhyāna pāramitā, attained
the complete fulfillment of the measureless light of the dhyāna

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
549
absorptions, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who, having
achieved the prajñā pāramitā, their wisdom light was able to produce
pervasively brilliant illumination, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bod­
hisattvas who had perfected the great vows, all of which were puri­
fied, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who had acquired
the wisdom lamp which brightly illuminates the Dharma gateways.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who had
become illuminated by the Dharma light of all buddhas of the ten
directions, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who, everywhere
throughout the ten directions, expounded on the dharmas for aban­
doning delusion, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who every­
where entered the kṣetras of all buddhas, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
bodhisattvas whose Dharma bodies reached the lands of all buddhas,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who acquired the voice of
the Buddha and were able to extensively awaken others, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who acquired the skillful means for the
development of all-knowledge, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisat­
tvas who perfected all gateways to the Dharma, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of bodhisattvas who perfected the Dharma wisdom comparable
to a jeweled banner which is able to everywhere reveal all dharmas
of the Buddha, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who were
able to reveal all spheres of action of the Tathāgata.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of heavenly kings who bowed
in reverence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of dragon kings who atten­
tively and insatiably contemplated this scene, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of yakṣa kings who raised their pressed palms above the crowns of
their heads, a hundred myriad koṭīs of gandharva kings who devel­
oped minds of pure faith, a hundred myriad koṭīs of asura kings who
cut off their thoughts of arrogance, a hundred myriad koṭīs of garuḍa
kings who held silken streamers in their mouths, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of kiṃnara kings who danced for joy, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of mahoraga kings who gazed up in joyful admiration, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of world leaders who bowed down their heads in rever­
ence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Trāyastriṃśa Heaven deva kings who
gazed up in admiration without blinking, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
Suyāma Heaven deva kings who uttered joyous praises, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of Tuṣita Heaven deva kings who prostrated their bod­
ies in reverence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Transformation-of-Bliss
Heaven deva kings who bowed down their heads in reverence, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of Paranirmita-vaśavartin Heaven deva kings who

550

The Flower Adornment Sutra
pressed their palms together in reverence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
Brahma Heaven deva kings who single-mindedly contemplated the
scene, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Maheśvara Heaven deva kings who
respectfully presented offerings, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of bod­
hisattvas who uttered praises.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of celestial nymphs who made
offerings with focused minds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of devas of
identical vows who danced for joy, a hundred myriad koṭīs of devas
who formerly dwelt together uttered marvelous sounding praises,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of Brahma-kāyika Heaven devas who pros­
trated their bodies in reverence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Brahma-
purohita Heaven devas who pressed their palms together atop their
heads, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Brahma-pāriṣadya devas who encir­
cled the area and served as guardians, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
Great Brahma Heaven devas who uttered praises of countless merito­
rious qualities, hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of devas from the Light
Heavens334 who bowed down in five-point prostration, including a
hundred myriad koṭīs of Lesser Light Heaven devas who proclaimed
their praises of the rarity of encountering a buddha in the world,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of Limitless Light Heaven devas who paid
reverence to the Buddha from a distance, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
Light and Sound Heaven devas who uttered praises of the rarity of
being able to see the Tathāgata, hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of devas
from the Purity Heavens335 who, bringing their palaces, came here to
pay their respects, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Lesser Purity Heaven
devas who, with purified minds, bowed down their heads in rever­
ence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Limitless Purity Heaven devas who
had come down, wishing to see the Buddha, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of Universal Purity Heaven devas who, feeling reverential esteem,
drew near and made offerings, hundreds of myriads of koṭīs of devas
from the Vastness Heavens336 who recalled roots of goodness estab­
lished in the past, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Lesser Vastness Heaven
devas who, having arrived where the Tathāgata dwelt, had thoughts
about the rarity of this event, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Limitless
Vastness Heaven devas who, resolute in their reverential esteem, ini­
tiated all kinds of good deeds, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Vast Fruition
Heaven devas who bowed their bodies in reverence, a hundred myr­
iad koṭīs of Trouble-Free Heaven devas who, with a steadfast faculty
of faith, bowed down in reverence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Heat-
Free Heaven Devas who pressed their palms together and tirelessly

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
551
practiced mindfulness of the Buddha, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Fine
Vision Heaven devas who bowed their heads to the ground in rev­
erence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Fine Manifestation Heaven devas
who, with ceaseless resolve, reflected on making offerings to the
Buddha, a hundred myriad koṭīs of Akaniṣṭha Heaven devas who
respectfully bowed down in reverence, a hundred myriad koṭīs of all
different kinds of devas who all joyously sang praises, and a hundred
myriad koṭīs of other devas who each engaged in skillful reflections
by which they created adornments.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattva devas who
guarded the Buddha’s throne and ceaselessly created adornments,
a hundred myriad koṭīs of flower-bearing bodhisattvas who rained
down many different kinds of flowers, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
incense-bearing bodhisattvas who rained down many different kinds
of incense, a hundred myriad koṭīs of garland-bearing bodhisatt­
vas who rained down many different kinds of garlands, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas bearing powdered incense who rained
down many different kinds of powdered incense, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of perfume-bearing bodhisattvas who rained down many dif­
ferent kinds of perfumes, a hundred myriad koṭīs of robe-bearing
bodhisattvas who rained down many different kinds of robes, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of canopy-bearing bodhisattvas who rained down
many different kinds of canopies, a hundred myriad koṭīs of banner-
bearing bodhisattvas who rained down many different kinds of ban­
ners, a hundred myriad koṭīs of pennant-bearing bodhisattvas who
rained down many different kinds of pennants, a hundred myriad
koṭīs of jewel-bearing bodhisattvas who rained down many different
kinds of jewels, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of adornment-bearing
bodhisattvas who rained down many different kinds of adornments.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of devas’ sons who emerged
from their heavenly palaces and came to the site of the throne, a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of devas’ sons who, with thoughts of pure faith,
came along with their palaces, a hundred myriad koṭīs of devas’ sons
who had been born into nobility who held up the throne with their
bodies, and a hundred myriad koṭīs of consecrated devas’ sons who
held up the throne with their entire bodies.
There were a hundred myriad koṭīs of meditating bodhisattvas
who engaged in reverential reflections, a hundred myriad koṭīs of
bodhisattvas at the station of acquiring noble birth who brought forth
pure resolve, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas whose faculties

552

The Flower Adornment Sutra
were all suffused with bliss, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas
whose deep resolve became purified, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bod­
hisattvas whose resolute faith was purified, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of bodhisattvas whose karmic actions were all purified, a hundred
myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who attained sovereign mastery in tak­
ing on rebirths, a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas whose light
of Dharma produced dazzling illumination, a hundred myriad koṭīs
of bodhisattvas who had perfected their cultivation of the grounds,
and a hundred myriad koṭīs of bodhisattvas who became well able to
teach and transform all beings.
These circumstances were born of a hundred myriad koṭīs of roots
of goodness, were guarded and sustained by a hundred myriad koṭīs
of buddhas, were brought to complete fulfillment through a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of accumulations of merit, were purified by a hun­
dred myriad koṭīs of extraordinarily supreme thoughts, were puri­
fied through a hundred myriad koṭīs of great vows, were produced
through a hundred myriad koṭīs of practices of goodness, were solidi­
fied through a hundred myriad koṭīs of good dharmas, were caused
to appear through a hundred myriad koṭīs of spiritual powers, were
brought to complete perfection through a hundred myriad koṭīs of
meritorious qualities, and were praised with a hundred myriad koṭīs
of dharmas of praise.
Just as in this world the Tuṣita Heaven King offered up for the
Tathāgata this high throne he had arranged, so too did all the Tuṣita
Heaven kings in all worlds also arrange thrones such as these with
adornments such as these, ceremonial propriety such as this, faithful
devotion such as this, purity of mind such as this, delight such as
this, joyfulness such as this, reverential esteem such as this, thoughts
of appreciation of its rarity such as this, joyous exultation such as
this, and thirst-like anticipation such as this. In each case, all of these
circumstances were the same.
At that time, after the Tuṣita Heaven King had arranged this throne
for the Tathāgata, his thoughts became imbued with deep reverential
esteem, whereupon, together with ten myriads of koṭīs of asaṃkhyeyas
of Tuṣita Heaven devas’ sons, he respectfully welcomed the Tathāgata
there, and, with purified minds, they then rained down asaṃkhyeyas
of clouds of colored flowers, rained down inconceivably many col­
ored incense clouds, rained down all different kinds of colored
garland clouds, rained down vast pure sandalwood clouds, rained
down countless clouds of all different kinds of canopies, rained down

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
553
clouds of marvelously fine heavenly robes, rained down boundlessly
many clouds of many kinds of marvelous jewels, rained down clouds
of heavenly adornments, rained down countless clouds of many dif­
ferent kinds of burning incense, and rained down clouds of all kinds
of sandalwood incense, agarwood incense, solid incense, and pow­
dered incense.
When those multitudes of devas’ sons had each produced all
these clouds from their own bodies, a hundred thousand koṭīs of
asaṃkhyeyas of Tuṣita Heaven devas’ sons together with all the other
multitudes of devas’ sons in that congregation, their minds all suf­
fused with joy, bowed down in reverence. An asaṃkhyeya of celes­
tial nymphs jumped up in delighted admiration and gazed up at the
Tathāgata with utmost attentiveness.
Within that Tuṣita Heaven palace, a multitude of ineffably many
bodhisattvas who stood there in space, with single-minded diligence,
presented offerings to the Buddha of offering gifts superior even to
those presented by the devas. They then bowed down in reverence
and an asaṃkhyeya of strands of music all played in unison.
At that time, due to the Tathāgata’s awesome spiritual powers, due
to the power flowing from roots of goodness established in the past,
and due to inconceivable powers of sovereign mastery, all the devas
and celestial nymphs in the Tuṣita Heaven palace then saw the Buddha
from afar just as if he were directly before their very eyes, whereupon
they all simultaneously thought, “The Tathāgata’s appearance in the
world is but rarely encountered. We are now able to see he who is
possessed of all-knowledge and the Dharma’s unimpeded right and
universal enlightenment.”
Having had this thought and having reflected in this manner, they
then all joined in simultaneously welcoming the Tathāgata as each
offered up to the Buddha in their heavenly robes an abundance of
every kind of flower, an abundance of every kind of incense, an abun­
dance of every kind of jewel, an abundance of every kind of adorn­
ment, an abundance of every kind of heavenly sandalwood pow­
dered incense, an abundance of every kind of heavenly agarwood
powdered incense, an abundance of every kind of precious heavenly
powdered incense, an abundance of every kind of fragrant heav­
enly flower, and an abundance of every kind of heavenly māndarāva
flower, all of which they offered up and spread forth as offerings to
the Buddha.
A hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of Tuṣita
Heaven devas’ sons, standing there in space, all conceiving of the

554

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Buddha as the realm of wisdom, burned all kinds of incense. The
incense vapors then took the shape of clouds adorning the sky.
Thinking of the Buddha with joy, they also rained down clouds
of all kinds of heavenly flowers which adorned the sky. Thinking of
the Buddha with deep reverence, they also rained down clouds of all
kinds of heavenly canopies which adorned the sky. Wishing to make
offerings to the Buddha, they also rained down clouds of all kinds of
heavenly garlands which adorned the sky. Thinking of the Buddha
with resolute faith, they also spread across the sky asaṃkhyeyas of
gold nets from which many different kinds of jeweled bells constantly
emanated marvelous sounds. Thinking of the Buddha as the most
supreme field of merit, they also adorned the sky with asaṃkhyeyas
of drapes which ceaselessly rained down clouds of all kinds of neck­
laces.
Thinking of the Buddha with deep faith, they also adorned empty
space with asaṃkhyeyas of heavenly palaces as all sorts of heavenly
music produced marvelous sounds. Thinking of the Buddha as the
most extremely rarely encountered, they also adorned the sky with
clouds of asaṃkhyeyas of many different kinds of colored heavenly
raiment that rained down all different kinds of incomparably mar­
velous robes. Thinking of the Buddha with thoughts of measureless
joyous exultation, they also adorned the sky with asaṃkhyeyas of jew­
eled celestial crowns and rained down countless celestial crowns that
formed a vast cloud. Thinking of the Buddha with joyous apprecia­
tion, they also adorned the sky with asaṃkhyeyas of many different
kinds of colored jewels and ceaselessly rained down clouds of many
different kinds of jeweled necklaces.
Thinking of the Buddha with pure faith, hundreds of thousands
of koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of devas’ sons, as offerings to the
Tathāgata, scattered countless different kinds of colored heavenly
flowers and burned countless different kinds of colored heavenly
incense. Thinking of the Buddha as a magnificent adorning transfor­
mation, they also held up countless different kinds of colored heavenly
powdered sandalwood incense which they offered up and scattered
as offerings to the Tathāgata. Thinking of the Buddha with thoughts
of joyous exultation, they also held up countless different kinds of
colored canopies with which they followed along after the Tathāgata.
Thinking of the Buddha as especially supreme, they also held up
countless different kinds of colored heavenly jeweled robes which
they spread out on the road as offerings to the Tathāgata. Thinking

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
555
of the Buddha with pure thoughts, they also held up countless dif­
ferent kinds of colorful heavenly jewel banners which they raised
to welcome the Tathāgata. Thinking of the Buddha with thoughts of
especially supreme joy, they also held up countless differently col­
ored heavenly adornments as offerings to the Tathāgata. Thinking
of the Buddha with thoughts of indestructible faith, they also held
up countless heavenly jeweled garlands as offerings to the Tathāgata.
And, thinking of the Buddha with thoughts of incomparable joy, they
also held up countless differently colored heavenly jeweled pennants
as offerings to the Tathāgata.
A hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of devas’ sons
with well-trained, harmonious, and quiescent minds free of neglect­
fulness played countless different colorations of celestial music, send­
ing forth marvelous sounds as offerings to the Tathāgata.
Then, a multitude of a hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of inef­
fably many bodhisattvas who formerly dwelt in the Tuṣita Heaven
Palace made offerings to the Buddha of offering gifts superior to those
of the devas, offerings that were born of having stepped beyond the
dharmas of the three realms of existence, that were born of having
abandoned all actions influenced by the afflictions, that were born
of pervasively unimpeded minds, that were born of the dharmas of
extremely profound skillful means, and that were born of incalcu­
lably vast wisdom, offerings that were increased by solid and pure
faith, that were produced from inconceivable roots of goodness, that
were perfected through the generation of asaṃkhyeyas of skillful
transformations, that were manifested by the resolve to make offer­
ings to the Buddha, and that bore the seal of the Dharma gateway of
effortlessness.
They then presented to the Buddha offering gifts superior even to
those presented by the devas, offering up then all kinds of jeweled
canopies born from the pāramitās, all kinds of flower curtains born
from the pure understanding of all buddhas’ spheres of action, all
kinds of robes born from the unproduced-dharmas patience, all kinds
of bell nets born from the unimpeded mind that penetrates the vajra
dharmas, all kinds of solid incense born from the mind that under­
stands all dharmas as like mere conjurations, all buddhas’ many-
jeweled marvelous thrones born from the mind that, pervading the
realms of all buddhas, is present at the throne of the Tathāgata,337 all
kinds of jeweled banners born from the mind that is tireless in mak­
ing offerings to the Buddha, all kinds of jeweled palaces dwelt in by

556

The Flower Adornment Sutra
buddhas produced from the joyous mind that understands all dhar­
mas as like a dream, and all kinds of jeweled lotus flower clouds born
from roots of goodness associated with non-attachment and roots of
goodness associated with the unproduced, clouds of all kinds of solid
incense, clouds of all kinds of infinitely varicolored flowers, clouds
of all kinds of different marvelous varicolored robes, clouds of all
kinds of infinitely pervasive pure sandalwood incense, clouds of all
kinds of marvelously adorned jeweled canopies, clouds of all kinds
of burning incense, clouds of all kinds of marvelous garlands, and
clouds of all kinds of pure adornments, all of which pervaded the
entire Dharma realm.
Every one of the bodies of all those bodhisattvas in turn sent
forth an ineffable number of hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayu­
tas of bodhisattvas which filled up the Dharma realm and the realm
of empty space. Their minds were the same as those of all buddhas
of the three periods of time. Because they were produced from the
Dharma free of inverted views and were aided by the power of count­
less tathāgatas, as they provided instructions to beings in the path to
peace and security, they were equipped with an ineffable number
of designations, flavors, and statements by which they thoroughly
penetrated the meaning of countless dharmas. They generated from
the seed syllables of all dhāraṇīs an endless treasury of eloquence and
fearlessness of mind, produced great happiness, and tirelessly used
an ineffable number of measureless and endless reality-accordant
praise dharmas to praise the Tathāgata.
At that time, all the multitudes of devas and bodhisattvas saw the
Tathāgata, the One Worthy of Offerings, the Rightly and Perfectly
Enlightened One, the inconceivable hero of humanity. His bodies
were so countless as to be indescribably numerous. They manifested
inconceivably many different kinds of spiritual transformations
which caused the minds of innumerably many beings to be filled
with great joy. They pervaded the Dharma realm and the realm of
empty space and were adorned with the Buddha’s adornments. They
enabled all beings to become established in roots of goodness and
manifested the countless spiritual powers of all buddhas which tran­
scend the reach of verbal description and inspire the admiration and
respect of all the great bodhisattvas. Adapting to those who should
be taught, they caused them all to be filled with joy. They dwelt in
the vast body of all buddhas with meritorious qualities and roots of
goodness that were already purified. They possessed the foremost
physical signs which no one can outshine.

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
557
His wisdom’s inexhaustible sphere of action is produced by his
incomparable samādhis. His boundless body everywhere dwells
even within the bodies of all beings, causing countless beings to all
be filled with immense joy and enabling the lineage of all-knowledge
to remain unbroken.
Dwelling in the ultimate realm in which all buddhas dwell, born
into the clan of all buddhas of the three periods of time, he causes
countless beings to develop purified resolute faith, enables the wis­
dom of all bodhisattvas to become perfected, and causes their fac­
ulties to become blissful. His cloud of Dharma covers everywhere
throughout the Dharma realm and provides teaching and training
to all without exception. Adapting to the minds of beings, he causes
them all to be completely satisfied and enables them to become estab­
lished in non-discriminating wisdom and step beyond all other
beings.
Having acquired all-knowledge, he emanates great radiance and
causes all of his roots of goodness from previous lives to manifest.
He everywhere inspires everyone to arouse the great resolve and
enables all beings to become established in Samantabhadra’s inde­
structible wisdom. He everywhere dwells in the lands of all beings, is
born from irreversible right Dharma, dwells in the uniform equality
of the Dharma realm, completely understands what is fitting for each
being’s mind, and manifests an ineffable-ineffable number of differ­
ent tathāgata bodies that are beyond the capacity of worldly discourse
to fully praise. He is able to cause everyone to always reflect upon
buddhahood, fills the Dharma realm, and extensively liberates the
many kinds of beings. Adapting to the benefits wished for by those
who have aroused their initial resolve, he bestows Dharma on them
with kindness, enables them to undergo the training and develop
purified resolute faith, and manifests inconceivably many form bod­
ies.
He regards beings impartially with a mind free of attachment.
He dwells in the station of the unimpeded and achieves the unob­
structed implementation of the ten powers of all buddhas. His mind
always remains in quiescent meditative absorption. It is never subject
to scattering or distraction, and it dwells in all-knowledge.
He is able to skillfully expound on the genuine meaning of the
many different scriptural passages and is everywhere able to deeply
enter the boundless ocean of wisdom and bring forth the treasury of
measureless meritorious qualities and wisdom. He constantly uses

558

The Flower Adornment Sutra
the sun of buddhahood to everywhere illuminate the Dharma realm,
to accord with the power of his original vows, to always appear and
never sink away, to constantly abide within the Dharma realm, to
dwell where the buddhas dwell, to never change, to remain entirely
free of any attachment to either I or mine, to dwell in the world-tran­
scending dharmas, and to remain undefiled by worldly dharmas.
He raises the banner of wisdom in all worlds. His wisdom is vast,
transcending the world, and it is free of any defiling attachment. He
extricates all beings, enabling them to be pulled forth from the mud
and placed on the ground of supreme wisdom. All of his merit is
devoted to benefiting beings and yet it remains forever inexhaustible.
He completely understands the wisdom possessed by all bodhisat­
tvas and how, once their faith leads them forth to the definite and
fixed position, they will then become bound to realize right enlight­
enment. With his great kindness and great compassion, he manifests
ineffably and measurelessly many buddha bodies with many differ­
ent kinds of adornments. Using his wondrous voice, he expounds on
countless dharmas, adapts to the minds of beings, and thus enables
them all to become completely satisfied.
Throughout the past, the future, and the present, with a mind that
is always pure, he enables all beings to refrain from attachment to
the realms of sense objects, constantly bestows predictions on all the
bodhisattvas, and enables them all to enter the lineage of the bud­
dhas, attain birth into the clan of the buddhas, and receive the bud­
dhas’ crown-anointing consecration.
He forever roams the ten directions, never resting, and yet he has
nothing he desires and nothing to which he is attached. He is able
to go everywhere to all the buddha kṣetras throughout the Dharma
realm. There are none of the minds of all beings that he does not com­
pletely know. All the merit he possesses is characterized by world-
transcending purity. He does not dwell in saṃsāra and yet he appears
within the world like a reflection that appears everywhere.
With the moon of wisdom, he everywhere illuminates the Dharma
realm, fully comprehending that nothing at all is apprehensible. With
his wisdom, he realizes that all worlds are like conjurations, like
reflections, like dreams, or like magically produced phenomena, and
realizes too that everything takes the mind as its inherent nature and
abides in this way.
Adapting to the differences in beings’ karmic retributions, to the
distinctions in their mental dispositions, and to the variations in

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
559
their individual faculties, he then manifests buddha bodies for them
accordingly. The Tathāgata always takes countless beings as the object
of his efforts, explaining for them that the world arises entirely from
conditions. He realizes that the characteristic sign of all dharmas
is signlessness, that they are characterized by only this single sign,
and that this is the root of wisdom. It is wishing to enable beings to
abandon their attachments to signs and wishing to reveal for them
the nature and characteristics of all worlds that he travels through the
world and reveals for them the unsurpassed bodhi.
It is for the sake of rescuing and protecting all beings that he
comes forth and manifests in the world and instructs them in the
path to buddhahood. He enables them to see the physical signs of
the Tathāgata, to recall them with a wish to acquire those conditions
for themselves, to diligently devote themselves to cultivation, to rid
themselves of the signs of the world’s afflictions, to cultivate the prac­
tices leading to bodhi with unscattered and unwavering resolve, to
achieve the complete fulfillment of the gateway of the Great Vehicle,
and to fully develop the meaning and benefit of all buddhas.
He is able to contemplate and assess all beings’ roots of goodness
and prevent the results of their pure karma from being destroyed.
With clear and completely understanding wisdom, he everywhere
enters the three periods of time. He forever abandons all worldly
discriminations and emanates a net of light that everywhere illu­
minates the ten directions and has no worlds it does not completely
fill with form bodies whose marvelous fine signs all beholders gaze
upon tirelessly. With great meritorious qualities, wisdom, and spiri­
tual superknowledges, he brings forth all the many different kinds of
bodhisattva practices, freely brings to complete fulfillment the objec­
tive spheres of all the faculties, does all of the works of the buddhas,
and then, having accomplished them, he disappears.
He is well able in the past, present, and future to provide instruc­
tion in the path to all-knowledge and to rain down the rain of count­
less dhāraṇīs for the sake of the bodhisattvas, thus enabling them to
develop vast aspirations, to take on and maintain the cultivation, to
perfect the meritorious qualities of all buddhas so that they are com­
pletely full and flourishing, to adorn their bodies with the features
of the boundless wonderful forms which no one in the world would
not directly see, to forever abandon all obstructive dharmas, to have
succeeded in attaining purified realization of the genuine meaning of
all dharmas, and to gain sovereign mastery in all the dharmas of the
meritorious qualities.

560

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He is the great king of the Dharma who, like the sun, everywhere
provides illumination. He is the world’s field of merit who is pos­
sessed of great awesome virtue. He manifests transformation bod­
ies everywhere in all worlds and emanates the light of wisdom by
which all are enabled to awaken. Wishing to enable beings to know
the Buddha’s perfectly fulfilled and boundless meritorious qualities,
he ties atop his crown the silken headband of the dharma of non-
obstruction, ascends to the position, and, adapting to those in the
world, uses skillful means to guide them as he comforts those beings
with the hand of wisdom. Serving as the great physician king who
skillfully treats their many illnesses, he is able to go forth everywhere
in the countless lands of all worlds without ever resting. With the
eye of pure wisdom which has separated from all of the obstructions
to vision, he is able to clearly see. In regard to all beings engaged in
unwholesome and evil karma, he uses all different kinds of means to
train them and enable them to enter the path, skillfully choosing the
right time and never resting.
In those instances where beings develop the mind of equanimity,
he then manifests for them the corresponding karmic result of such
equanimity, adapts to their mental dispositions, adapts to the fruits
of their karma, manifests for them the body of a buddha and many
different spiritual transformations, and then explains the Dharma for
them, thereby enabling them to awaken and understand, to acquire
Dharma wisdom, to have thoughts of great joy, to experience exul­
tant happiness in all their sense faculties, to see countless buddhas,
to develop profound and deep faith, to develop all the roots of good­
ness, and to become forever irreversible.
All beings, in accordance with the bondage produced by their
karma, sleep on for a long time in saṃsāra. Having come forth into
the world, the Tathāgata is able to awaken them, comfort their minds,
and enable them to become free of worry and fear. In the case of those
who are able to see him, he enables them all to realize and enter inde­
pendent knowledge of meaning. His wisdom, skillful means, com­
plete comprehension of spheres of cognition, and adornment with the
marvelous subsidiary signs cannot be outshone by anyone. Having
already purified the sprouts of Dharma on the mountain of wisdom,
he then sometimes manifests as a bodhisattva and sometimes mani­
fests in the body of a buddha to enable all beings to reach the ground
free of misfortune. Adorned with the countless meritorious qualities
and perfected through his actions, he manifests within the world. Of

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
561
all the pure adornments of all buddhas, there are none that are not
perfected by his actions related to all-knowledge.
He always preserves his original vows, never abandons those in
the world, and always serves all beings as their steadfast good friend.
He enables all beings to succeed in directly observing the immacu­
late radiance of his foremost purity. Through the use of his spiritual
powers, the Buddha always follows along after and never abandons
the countlessly and boundlessly many beings in the six destinies of
rebirth. Where there are those with whom he has jointly engaged in
the planting of roots of goodness in the past, he enables them all to
attain purity and thus never abandons his original vows with respect
to all beings within the six destinies, having none whom he might
otherwise have deceived. He always uses skillful means based on
wholesome dharmas to gather them in. He then enables them to culti­
vate pure karmic deeds and vanquishes all māras who might struggle
with them.
He brings forth vast power from the realm of the unimpeded. His
most supreme treasury of solar radiance is unimpeded in its manifes­
tation of reflections in the realm of the pure mind which no one in the
world does not see. He uses many different dharmas in his extensive
giving to beings. The Buddha is a boundless treasury of light whose
powers and wisdom are all perfectly fulfilled. He constantly uses his
great radiance to illuminate beings everywhere. Whichever wishes
they have made, he enables them all to be fulfilled and also enables
them to leave behind all adversaries. He serves them as the unsur­
passed field of merit upon whom all beings jointly rely. He enables
whatever they give to become purified and enables even their slight­
est good deeds to result in their receiving measureless merit. Thus he
enables them all to succeed in entering the ground of inexhaustible
wisdom. He is the pure-minded lord who plants roots of goodness
for beings and he serves for beings as the supremely good field for
them to produce merit. Through extremely deep wisdom and skillful
expedient means, he is able to rescue all from the sufferings of the
three wretched destinies.
Just so should one have resolute faith, just so should one contem­
plate, just so should one enter the depths of wisdom, just so should
one sail on the ocean of meritorious qualities, just so should one
everywhere arrive at space-like wisdom, just so should one know
beings’ field of merit, just so should one use right mindfulness in
directly present contemplation, just so should one contemplate the

562

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Buddha’s major marks and subsidiary signs produced by his deeds,
just so should one contemplate the Buddha’s appearance throughout
the world, and just so should one contemplate the Buddha’s sovereign
mastery of the spiritual superknowledges.
At that time, those in that great congregation saw the body of the
Tathāgata emanating from every one of its pores hundreds of thou­
sands of koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of light rays. Every one of those
light rays had an asaṃkhyeya of colors, an asaṃkhyeya of purities, and
an asaṃkhyeya of shining illuminations that caused an asaṃkhyeya of
beings to contemplate, caused an asaṃkhyeya of beings to be filled
with joyous delight, caused an asaṃkhyeya of beings to be filled with
happiness, caused an asaṃkhyeya of beings to increase their deep
faith, caused an asaṃkhyeya of beings to develop purified aspirations,
caused an asaṃkhyeya of beings to experience clarity and coolness in
all their faculties, and caused an asaṃkhyeya of beings to develop rev­
erential esteem.
Then that great multitude all saw the body of the Buddha emanate
hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of inconceivable light rays
of which every one of those light rays had inconceivably many col­
ors and inconceivably many lights that illuminated the inconceivable
and boundless Dharma realm.
Because of the Buddha’s spiritual powers, there emerged an
immense and marvelous sound. That sound then proclaimed a hun­
dred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of inconceivable praise verses that
were transcendently superior to any expressed in worldly language
and that were produced through world-transcending roots of good­
ness.
He also manifested hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of
inconceivably marvelous adornments which could not be completely
praised even in hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of incon­
ceivably long kalpas. These phenomena were all produced through
the Tathāgata’s inexhaustible sovereign masteries.
He also manifested the appearance of an ineffable number of bud­
dhas, tathāgatas, coming forth and appearing in the world to enable all
beings to enter the gateway of wisdom and understand the extremely
profound meaning.
He also manifested all the transformations of an ineffable num­
ber of buddhas, tathāgatas, to the very ends of the Dharma realm and
the realm of empty space that enabled all worlds to become equally
purified. All phenomena such as these arose from the unimpeded

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
563
all-knowledge in which the Tathāgata abides and also came forth
from the inconceivable supreme virtue cultivated by the Tathāgata.
He also manifested hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of
inconceivable lights produced by the flaming radiance of jewels,
lights which arose because of the roots of goodness associated with
past great vows, because he made offerings to countless tathāgatas
and cultivated pure practices without neglectfulness, and because of
roots of goodness created by his unimpeded resolve to attain omni­
science. [He manifested these] to reveal the vast pervasiveness of the
Tathāgata’s powers, to cut off all beings’ doubts, to enable them all to
see the Tathāgata, to enable countless beings to dwell in roots of good­
ness, to reveal how the power of the Tathāgata’s spiritual superknowl­
edges cannot be outshone by anyone, because he wished to enable
beings everywhere to enter the ocean of the ultimate, to enable the
great assemblies of bodhisattvas throughout all the buddha kṣetras to
come and gather together, and because he wished to provide instruc­
tion in the inconceivable Dharma gateways of the Buddha.
At that time, the Tathāgata, his great compassion extending to
everyone, revealed all these adornments to his all-knowledge, wish­
ing to thereby enable the beings in an ineffable number of hundreds
of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of worlds who did not
yet have faith to have faith, who already had faith to increase it, who
had already increased it to attain purity, who had already attained
purity to become fully ripened, and who had already become fully
ripened to develop well-trained minds.
[He did this wishing too that] they could then contemplate the
extremely profound Dharma, could fully develop the light of mea­
sureless wisdom, could bring forth measurelessly vast resolve, the
irreversible resolve to attain omniscience, could never go against the
nature of dharmas, could not fear the apex of reality, could realize
genuine truth, could fulfill the practice of all the pāramitās, and could
purify all the world-transcending roots of goodness.
[And he did this wishing too that], like Samantabhadra, they
could acquire the sovereign masteries of the Buddha, could aban­
don the realms of Māra, could enter the realms of all buddhas, could
completely know the profound dharmas, could acquire inconceivable
wisdom, could become forever irreversible in the vows of the Great
Vehicle, could always see all buddhas and never separate from them,
could perfect realized wisdom, could realize the immeasurable dhar­
mas, could completely develop the power of a treasury of boundless

564

The Flower Adornment Sutra
merit, could develop the joyous mind, could enter the ground of free­
dom from doubt, could attain the purity of separation from what­
ever is evil, could rely upon all-knowledge, could see the unmoving
character of dharmas, could be able to enter the congregation of all
bodhisattvas, and could then always be reborn into the family of all
tathāgatas of the three periods of time.
The adornments such as these that were displayed here by the
Bhagavat were all created by roots of goodness accumulated in the
past [and were revealed here]: to provide all beings with training
and discipline; to show the Tathāgata’s immense awesome virtue;
to illuminate his treasury of unimpeded wisdom; to reveal the ulti­
mate blazing radiance of the Tathāgata’s boundless supreme virtue;
to display the Tathāgata’s inconceivable great spiritual transforma­
tions; to use the power of the spiritual superknowledges to reveal
the Buddha’s body in all the destinies of rebirth; to reveal the bound­
lessness of the transformations produced by the Tathāgata’s spiritual
superknowledges; to bring about complete fulfillment of all his origi­
nal vows; to reveal the ability of the Tathāgata’s courageous wisdom
to reach everywhere; to show his having become the Dharma King
with sovereign mastery of the Dharma; to bring forth the gateways
to the realization of all-encompassing wisdom; to show the purity
of the Tathāgata’s body; to also reveal the most extraordinary mar­
velousness of his body; to show his realization of the same Dharma
of all buddhas of the three periods of time; to reveal his treasury of
pure roots of goodness; to show his supremely marvelous form inde­
scribable by any worldly analogy; to show the signs of his complete
fulfillment of the ten powers that cause all who behold them to never
tire of doing so; and to manifest as the sun of the world illuminating
all three periods of time.
All of these meritorious qualities of the Dharma King possessed
of the sovereign masteries were manifested by his past roots of
goodness. Even if all bodhisattvas proclaimed their praises of them
throughout all kalpas, they could still never come to the end of them.
At that time, having brought forth such adornments and offering
gifts as these for the Tathāgata, the Tuṣita Heaven King together with
hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of Tuṣita
Heaven devas’ sons all then faced the Buddha with palms pressed
together and addressed the Buddha, saying, “Welcome, O Bhagavat.
Welcome, Well Gone One. Welcome Tathāgata, the One Worthy of
Offerings, the One of Right and Perfect Enlightenment. We only hope
that the Buddha will please sojourn in this palace.”

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
565
At that time, the Bhagavat, adorned with the adornments of the
buddhas and possessed of immense awesome virtue—to enable all
beings to be filled with great joy; to enable all bodhisattvas to pro­
duce deep awakening and understanding; to enable all the Tuṣita
Heaven devas’ sons to increase their determination; to allow the
Tuṣita Heaven King to bring forth his tireless presentation of offer­
ings and service; to enable countless beings to focus their mindful­
ness on the Buddha and arouse the resolve; to enable countless beings
to plant roots of goodness and produce the endless merit of seeing the
Buddha; to facilitate their ability to always bring forth pure faith; to
ensure that, in seeing the Buddha and making offerings, they would
have nothing they seek; to enable all their aspirations to be purified;
to ensure that they would be ceaselessly diligent in accumulating
roots of goodness; and to ensure that they would make the great vow
to seek the attainment of all-knowledge—he then accepted the invita­
tion of that king of the heavens and entered the Palace of Every Jewel.
And just as this was so in this world, so too did this also occur in all
worlds throughout the ten directions.
Then the Palace of Every Jewel spontaneously acquired marvel­
ously fine adornments surpassing the adornments in all the heavens.
A net of all kinds of jewels appeared above and all around it. There
were clouds that everywhere rained all kinds of marvelous jewels,
clouds that everywhere rained all kinds of adornments, clouds that
everywhere rained all kinds of bejeweled robes, clouds that every­
where rained all kinds of sandalwood incense, clouds that every­
where rained all kinds of solid incense, clouds that everywhere
rained all kinds of canopies adorned with jewels, and clouds that
everywhere rained inconceivable bouquets of flowers. There every­
where arose the inconceivable sounds of maidens singing praises of
the Tathāgata’s knowledge of all modes, all of them in accordance
with the sublime Dharma. All these offering gifts were superior to
those offered up by the devas.
Then, as the sound of the maidens singing praises in the Tuṣita
Heaven palace continued with ceaseless and strong passion, due to
the Buddha’s spiritual power, the mind of the Tuṣita Heaven King
was enabled to remain unwavering and undistracted. All of his roots
of goodness from the distant past became perfectly full. His count­
less good dharmas became ever stronger. His pure faith increased.
He produced great vigor, felt great joyous delight, brought forth
pure and profound aspiration, resolved to attain bodhi, engaged in

566

The Flower Adornment Sutra
uninterrupted mindfulness of the Dharma, and comprehensively
retained it all, never to forget it.
At that time, assisted by the awesome power of the Buddha, the
Tuṣita Heaven King recalled his past planting of roots of goodness in
the presence of the buddhas of the past, whereupon he spoke these
verses:
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Unimpeded Moon,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of adornments.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Vast Wisdom,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very gold-colored hall.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Universal Eye,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of lotus flowers.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Coral,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of jewel treasuries.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Lion of the Doctrine,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of the mountain king.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Solar Radiance,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of many flowers.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Boundless Radiance,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of tree adornments.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Dharma Banner,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of the jeweled palace.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Wisdom Lamp,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,

Chapter 23 — The Ascent to the Tuṣita Heaven Palace
567
who entered this very hall of the fragrant mountain.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
In the past, there was a tathāgata known as Light of the Qualities,
the most supreme of all in auspiciousness,
who entered this very hall of maṇi jewels.
This place is therefore the most auspicious.
Just as, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, this world’s Tuṣita
Heaven king used verses to praise buddhas of the past, so too did the
Tuṣita Heaven kings in all the worlds of the ten directions also then
praise the meritorious qualities of the buddhas in this same way.
The Bhagavat then sat in the lotus posture on the maṇi jewel dais
lion throne in the Palace of Every Jewel and, through the marvel­
ous and masterful functions of the pure Dharma body, dwelt in the
same realm with all buddhas of the three periods of time. Abiding in
all-knowledge, together with all buddhas, he entered the one nature.
With the complete clarity of the buddha eye, he was unimpeded in
his perception of all dharmas. Possessed of great awesome powers,
he roamed everywhere throughout the Dharma realm, never rest­
ing. Equipped with the great spiritual superknowledges, wherever
there were beings amenable to being taught, he was able to go every­
where to all those places. Adorned with the unimpeded adornments
of all buddhas and knowing well the appropriate time, he taught the
Dharma for the multitudes.
Congregations of ineffably many bodhisattvas came from the
many different countries of other regions and assembled there, form­
ing a pure assembly where, in non-dual identity with the Dharma
body and relying on nothing at all, they were then able to exercise
sovereign mastery in manifesting the actions of a buddha’s body.
After he sat on this throne, there then spontaneously appeared
within that hall measurelessly and innumerably many extraordi­
narily and marvelously fine offering gifts superior to any presented
by the devas, namely flower garlands, robes, perfumes, powdered
incense, jeweled canopies, banners, flags, maidens playing music and
singing praises, and other phenomena such as these, each and every
one of which was present in indescribably great numbers. With vast
thoughts of reverential esteem, [the bodhisattvas] presented these
as offerings to the Buddha. So too was this also so in all the Tuṣita
Heavens throughout the ten directions.
The End of Chapter Twenty-Three

568

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Chapter 24
The Tuṣita Heaven Palace Praise Verses
At that time, because of the Buddha’s spiritual powers, from each
of the ten directions, beyond a number of lands as numerous as the
atoms in a myriad buddha kṣetras, great bodhisattvas came to pay
their respects to the Buddha, each of whom was attended by bod­
hisattvas as numerous as the atoms in a myriad buddha kṣetras. Their
names were Vajra Banner Bodhisattva, Solid Banner Bodhisattva,
Courage Banner Bodhisattva, Radiance Banner Bodhisattva, Wisdom
Banner Bodhisattva, Jeweled Banner Bodhisattva, Vigor Banner
Bodhisattva, Immaculate Purity Banner Bodhisattva, Constellation
Banner Bodhisattva, and Dharma Banner Bodhisattva.
The lands from which they came were Wondrous Jewels World,
Wondrous Music World, Wondrous Silver World, Wondrous Gold
World, Wondrous Maṇi Jewel World, Wondrous Vajra World,
Wondrous Padma World, Wondrous Utpala Lotus World, Wondrous
Sandalwood World, and Wondrous Fragrance World.
They had each purely cultivated brahmacarya under buddhas.
Those buddhas were Endless Banner Buddha, Wind Banner Buddha,
Liberation Banner Buddha, Awesome Deportment Banner Buddha,
Radiant Signs Banner Buddha, Eternity Banner Buddha, Supremacy
Banner Buddha, Sovereign Mastery Banner Buddha, Brahman Banner
Buddha, and Contemplation Banner Buddha.
After those bodhisattvas had arrived in the presence of the
Buddha, they bowed down in reverence at the feet of the Buddha.
With the assistance of the Buddha’s spiritual powers, they each con­
jured a marvelous jeweled dais lion throne covered by a jeweled net
that encircled and completely filled the area. Then, off in each of the
directions from which they came, each of those bodhisattvas’ congre­
gations sat down on their seats in the lotus posture.
Then their bodies all emanated a hundred thousand koṭīs of nayu­
tas of asaṃkhyeyas of pure light rays. These rays of light all arose from
these bodhisattvas’ jewel of the pure mind and from their great vows
by which they abandoned all faults. They revealed the pure dhar­
mas of all buddhas’ sovereign masteries. Through the power of their
impartial vows, those bodhisattvas were everywhere able to rescue

570

The Flower Adornment Sutra
and protect all beings. They were those whom everyone in the world
delighted in seeing and those who saw them did not do so in vain, for
all who saw them acquired the training and discipline. Those mul­
titudes of bodhisattvas had already perfected countless meritorious
qualities, for example:338
They roam, unimpeded, to the lands of all buddhas;
They see the non-dependent pure Dharma body;
They use the wisdom body to manifest countless bodies that go
throughout the ten directions, serving the buddhas;
They enter all buddhas’ measureless, boundless, and inconceivable
dharmas of sovereign mastery;
They dwell in the countless gateways of all-knowledge using the light
of wisdom to thoroughly understand all dharmas;
They attain fearlessness with respect to all dharmas by which, what­
ever they expound upon, they may do so with inexhaustible elo­
quence to the very end of future time;
With great wisdom, they open the gateway to the complete-retention
[dhāraṇīs];
With the purified wisdom eye, they enter the deep Dharma realm;
Their wisdom’s sphere of cognition is boundless; and
Their ultimate purity is space-like.
Just as the multitudes of bodhisattvas gathered together there in this
world’s Tuṣita Heaven palace, so too did bodhisattvas of these very
same names gather together in all the other Tuṣita Heaven Palaces
throughout the ten directions in which the names of the countries
from which they came and the buddhas with which they were associ­
ated were all identical and no different.
At that time, the Bhagavat emanated from his two kneecaps hun­
dreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of light rays that everywhere
illuminated all worlds throughout the Dharma realm and the realm
of empty space. All of those other bodhisattvas were able to see the
appearance of this buddha’s spiritual transformations and all of
these bodhisattvas were able to see the appearance of all those other
tathāgatas’ spiritual transformations.
In the past, all of these bodhisattvas had planted roots of goodness
and cultivated the bodhisattva practices together with Vairocana
Tathāgata. They had all already awakened to and entered all bud­
dhas’ sovereign masteries and extremely deep liberations, had
already acquired the body of the undifferentiated Dharma realm,
had entered all lands and yet had no place where they dwelt, had

Chapter 24 — The Tuṣita Heaven Palace Praise Verses
571
already seen countless buddhas whom they had visited and served,
and had in a single mind-moment traveled freely and unimpededly
throughout the Dharma realm. Their minds were pure, like price­
less jewels. They were aided by the constant protective mindfulness
of measurelessly and countlessly many buddhas. Together with the
assistance provided by their powers, they had reached the far shore
of the ultimate and foremost degree of perfection. They constantly
dwelt with pure mindfulness in the unsurpassed enlightenment and
in every succeeding thought-moment they accessed the station of all-
knowledge in which they entered what is immense through what is
small and entered what is small through what is immense, being able
in all cases to do so with sovereign mastery and unimpeded penetrat­
ing comprehension.
They have already acquired the body of a buddha and dwell
together with the buddha. They have acquired all-knowledge and
create their bodies through all-knowledge. Wherever all tathāgatas
travel, they are able to follow along and enter there. They reveal and
explain the Dharma gateways of wisdom, reach all the way to the
vajra banner on the far shore of great wisdom, attain the vajra medita­
tive absorption, and cut off all doubts and delusions.
They have already acquired the sovereign masteries and spiritual
superknowledges of all buddhas and have everywhere entered the
lands of the ten directions and undertaken the teaching and training
of hundreds of thousands of myriads of koṭīs of numberless beings.
Although they retain no attachment to any of the enumerations of
dharmas, they are nonetheless able to skillfully cultivate, train in,
and perfect ultimate skillful means and establish all dharmas.
Multitudes of hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of ineffa­
bles of bodhisattvas such as these who were possessed of inexhaust­
ible purity and a treasury of all the measureless meritorious qualities
of the three periods of time all came and assembled there in the pres­
ence of the Buddha. This occurred in the same way in the abodes of
all those other buddhas who were seen because of this emanation of
light.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Vajra Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The Tathāgata does not come forth into the world,
nor does he have any nirvāṇa.
It is through the power of his great original vows
that he manifests his Dharma of sovereign mastery.

572

The Flower Adornment Sutra
This Dharma is inconceivable.
It is not a place in which thought can act.
It is only with wisdom that has reached the far shore
that one may then see the realm of all buddhas.
The form body is not the Buddha.
So too is this true of his voice.
Still, it is not apart from his form and voice
that one sees the power of the Buddha’s spiritual superknowledges.
One of but lesser wisdom is unable to know
the true realm of all buddhas.
It is only through long cultivation of pure deeds
that one might then be able to completely understand it.
The Rightly Enlightened One has no place from which he comes,
nor does he have any place to which he goes.
His pure and marvelous form body
appears through spiritual powers.
He manifests the body of the Tathāgata
in countless worlds
and extensively discourses on the sublime Dharma,
yet his mind has nothing whatsoever to which it is attached.
His wisdom which is boundless
completely penetrates all dharmas.
He everywhere enters the Dharma realm,
manifesting his powers of sovereign mastery.
He is unimpeded in his complete comprehension
of all beings and all dharmas.
He everywhere manifests the appearances of many forms
throughout all the kṣetras.
If one aspires to strive for all-knowledge
and the rapid realization of the unsurpassed enlightenment,
he should resort to the pure and wondrous mind
to cultivate the bodhi practices.
If one should witness the Tathāgata’s
awesome spiritual powers such as these,
he should then make offerings to the Supremely Honored One
and should not give rise to any doubts.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Solid Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The Tathāgata is incomparably supreme,
extremely profound, and indescribable.

Chapter 24 — The Tuṣita Heaven Palace Praise Verses
573
He goes beyond the path of words and speech
and is as pure as space itself.
As you contemplate the sovereign masteries
and spiritual powers of the Lion Among Men,
they have already gone beyond discriminations,
and yet they enable one to distinguish and see them.
It is in order to reveal and expound upon
the extremely profound and sublime Dharma—
It is because of these causes and conditions
that the Master Guide manifests this incomparable body.
This is the station in which
the greatly wise ones, the buddhas, act.
If one wishes to completely know it,
then one should always draw near to the Buddha.
If one makes offerings to all tathāgatas
with a mind whose actions are always pure,
doing so with a mind that never grows weary,
then one will be able to enter the Buddha’s path.
Possessing endless meritorious qualities
and dwelling solidly in the resolve to attain bodhi—
By this, one becomes rid of the net of doubts
and tirelessly gazes upon the Buddha.
Completely comprehending all dharmas—
By this, one then becomes a true son of the Buddha.
A person such as this become able to fully know
all buddhas’ powers of sovereign mastery.
As explained by those possessed of vast wisdom,
it is zeal that forms the very root of all dharmas.
Thus one should bring forth the supreme aspiration
and resolve to strive for the unsurpassed enlightenment.
Wherever there is anyone who reveres the Buddha
and bears in mind the wish to repay the Buddha’s kindnesses,
that person will never be separated
from the abodes of all buddhas.
What person possessed of wisdom
who, having succeeded in seeing and hearing the Buddha,
could fail to cultivate the pure vows
and then walk the path that the Buddha has traveled?
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Courage Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:

574

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Just as one with eyes possessed of clear vision
is able due to the sun to see the many forms,
so too it is with one possessed of a pure mind
who, by the power of the Buddha, is able to see the Tathāgata.
Just as, through the power of vigor,
one can reach the very bottom of the ocean’s depths,
so too it is with the power of wisdom
by which one succeeds in seeing countless buddhas.
Just as, in an especially good and fertile field,
whatever is planted will certainly thrive and grow,
so too it is with the ground of the pure mind
that produces the dharmas of all buddhas.
Just as a person who has acquired a treasury of jewels
forever leaves behind the sufferings of poverty,
so too, when the bodhisattva acquires the Dharma of the Buddha,
he leaves behind defilements and attains a mind that is pure.
Just as the agada cure-all medicine
is able to eliminate all poisons,
so too it is with the Dharma of the Buddha
which extinguishes all the afflictions’ illnesses.
The true good spiritual guides
have been praised by the Tathāgata,
for it is through their awesome spiritual powers
that one is able to hear the Dharma of all buddhas.
Even if one were for countless kalpas
to present gifts of wealth and jewels to the Buddha,
so long as one did not know the true signs of buddhahood,
this would still not truly qualify as giving.
Though countless signs of his physical form
adorn the body of the Buddha,
it is still not the case that in those signs of his physical form
one is able to succeed in seeing the Buddha.
The Tathāgata, the one of right and perfect enlightenment,
is quiescent and forever unmoving,
and yet he is able to manifest bodies everywhere
that pervade and fill up the worlds of the ten directions.
Just as the realm of empty space
is neither produced nor destroyed,
so too the Dharma of all buddhas
is ultimately free of creation or destruction.

Chapter 24 — The Tuṣita Heaven Palace Praise Verses
575
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Radiance Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
Among humans as well as in the heavens,
within all worlds,
one may everywhere see the Tathāgata’s
pure and marvelous form body.
Just as it is through the power of the one mind
that one is able to bring forth the many sorts of thoughts,
in this same way, the one body of the Buddha
everywhere manifests all buddhas.
Bodhi is free of dual dharmas
and it is also free of all signs,
and yet, within the sphere of dual dharmas,
there appear the signs adorning the body.
By fathoming the nature of dharmas as empty, quiescent,
and as arising like conjurations,
one’s sphere of action then become endless.
It is in this way that the Master Guide appears.
The Dharma body of all buddhas
of the three periods of time is entirely pure.
It is in accordance with those amenable to being taught
that the marvelous form bodies everywhere appear.
The Tathāgata does not have thoughts that say:
“I shall create bodies such as these.”
Rather, they naturally manifest
without ever producing any such discriminations.
The Dharma realm is undifferentiated
and it also has nothing on which it depends,
and yet, within the world,
countless bodies are manifested.
The body of the Buddha is not changing,339
and yet it is not that it does not change.
In the Dharma that is free of transformations
are manifested forms that are transformations.
The Rightly Enlightened One is immeasurable,
equal to the Dharma realm and the realm of empty space.
In what is so deep and vast as to be boundless and bottomless,
the path of words and speech is entirely cut off.
The Tathāgata has a thoroughly penetrating comprehension
of the paths that are traveled in reaching all places,

576

The Flower Adornment Sutra
and, in going to the many lands of the Dharma realm,
wherever he goes, he is everywhere unimpeded.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Wisdom Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
If a person is able to believe in and accept
unimpeded omniscience,
then, in cultivating the bodhi practices,
his mind will become immeasurable.
Within all lands, [the Buddha]
everywhere manifests countless bodies,
and yet those bodies do not dwell in any place
and also do not dwell in any dharma.
The bodies manifested through spiritual powers
by each and every one of the tathāgatas—
even in an inconceivable number of kalpas,
no one could ever completely calculate their numbers.
Though one might be able to know the number
of all beings existing throughout the three periods of time,
the manifestations produced by the tathāgatas
are such that their number could never be found.
Sometimes, they may manifest one or two,
and so forth, on up to countlessly many bodies
that appear everywhere in the kṣetras of the ten directions.
Yet, in reality, there are not even two kinds.340
It is just as, when the clear and full moon
appears everywhere in all the bodies of water,
although its reflected images are countless,
that original moon has still never been even twofold.
In this same way, when the one of unimpeded knowledge
realizes the right and perfect enlightenment
and appears everywhere throughout all kṣetras,
the Buddha’s body is still never twofold.
It is not merely one nor dual,
and it is also not measureless.
In accordance with those who are amenable to teaching,
he manifests countless bodies.
The Buddha’s body is not associated with the past,
nor is it associated with the future.
Rather, in but a single mind-moment, he manifests birth,
realization of the path, and nirvāṇa.

Chapter 24 — The Tuṣita Heaven Palace Praise Verses
577
Just as forms created through conjuration
have no birth or any arising.
So too it is with the bodies of the Buddha
that manifest appearances and yet are unproduced.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Jeweled Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The measureless body of the Buddha
is able to manifest measurelessly many bodies.
It is in accordance with what others should see
that the Master Guide manifests in these ways.
The body of the Buddha has no place in which it dwells
even as it completely fills all places.
Like space, it is boundless.
It is just so inconceivable as this.
This is not a place to which one’s mind can reach,
for, within it, the mind does not arise.
Within the sphere of cognition of all buddhas,
there is ultimately neither any production nor destruction.
Just as what is seen by one with cataracts
is neither what is within nor what is without—
The world’s vision of the buddhas,
one should realize is just like this.
It is in order to benefit beings
that the Tathāgata comes forth into the world.
Beings perceive that there is a coming forth,
and yet, in truth, he has no arising in the world.
One cannot anchor one’s perception of the Buddha
to any land, any day, or any night.
As for years, months, or moments,
one should realize that these are just the same.
Although beings speak in just this way,
claiming the Buddha attained enlightenment on a certain day,
in truth, the Tathāgata’s realization of bodhi
is not something that can be bound to any day.
The Tathāgata has abandoned all discriminations,
is not of any time,341 and transcends all phenomena.342
All the Master Guides of the three periods of time
come forth and appear in this way.
Just as, even though the sun’s clearly shining orb
does not coexist with the darkness of the night,

578

The Flower Adornment Sutra
one still speaks of “the night of such and such a day.”
So too it is with the dharmas of the Buddha.
And just as, even though all kalpas of the three periods of time
do not coexist with the Tathāgata,
one still speaks of “the buddhas of the three periods of time.”
So too it is with the dharmas of the Master Guide.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Vigor Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
Just as all the bodies of the Master Guides are identical,
so too it is with the meanings they set forth.
Still, everywhere throughout the kṣetras of the ten directions,
adapting to what is fitting, they appear in many different ways.
You should observe the Honored Muni:
Whatever he does is very rare and extraordinary.
He fills up the entire Dharma realm,
and is present in every place without exception.
The body of the Buddha does not abide inwardly,
and it also does not reside outwardly.
It is manifested because of spiritual powers.
The Dharma of the Master Guide is also just like this.
It is in accordance with the karma accumulated
by all the various types of beings in their previous lives
that their various sorts of bodies such as these
then each manifest as being different.
In this same way, the bodies of all buddhas
are measurelessly and innumerably many.
However, aside from the greatly enlightened Honored One,
no one else can even conceive of what they are like.
Just as the existence of a “self” is inconceivable
and such that no one could grasp it through actions of the mind,
so too it is with the inconceivability of buddhahood itself,
for it is not something that appears through actions of the mind.
Just as the kṣetras are inconceivable
even as one can still see their pure adornments,
so too it is with the inconceivability of the Buddha,
for there are none of the wondrous signs that do not appear in him.
Just as it is so with all dharmas
that it is because of many conditions that they arise,
so too it is with seeing the Buddha,
which necessarily depends on many good deeds.

Chapter 24 — The Tuṣita Heaven Palace Praise Verses
579
Just as a wish-fulfilling pearl
is able to fulfill the wishes in the minds of beings,
so too it is with the Dharma of all buddhas,
for it is able to fulfill all of one’s aspirations.
Within the countlessly many lands,
the Master Guides appear within the world.
It is in accordance with the power of their vows
that they respond everywhere throughout the ten directions.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Immaculate Purity
Banner Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these
verses:
The light of the Tathāgata’s great wisdom
everywhere purifies all worlds.
Once those worlds have been purified,
he reveals and explains the Dharma of all buddhas.
Even if there were a person who wished to see
buddhas equal in number to all beings,
none of them would not respond to his aspiration,
and yet, in truth, there is no place from which they come.
If he were to then take the Buddha as the object
on which he exclusively focused his mindfulness while never resting,
this person would then succeed in seeing buddhas
whose numbers were the same as however many he had wished for.343
In perfecting the dharmas of pristine purity
and completely fulfilling the development of all meritorious qualities,
such a person focuses his mindfulness and unrelenting resolve
on his quest to achieve the attainment of all-knowledge.
It is according to what is fitting that the Master Guide
expounds on the Dharma for beings.
Wherever there are those amenable to being taught,
he everywhere manifests the most supreme of bodies.
The body of the Buddha as well as [the bodies] of those in the world
are all in every case devoid of any self.
It is by awakening to this that one realizes right enlightenment
and then in turn explains it for beings.
All the Lions among Men
possess measureless powers of sovereign mastery
by which, even if they manifested bodies as numerous as thoughts,
those bodies could each appear as different.
As are the bodies such as these of those in the world,
so too are the bodies of all buddhas.

580

The Flower Adornment Sutra
If one completely comprehends their inherent nature,
this then is to speak of the Buddha.
The Tathāgata everywhere knows and sees
and completely understands all dharmas.
The Buddha’s Dharma and bodhi
are both such that they can never be apprehended.
The Master Guide has no coming or going
and he also has no place in which he dwells.
He has entirely abandoned all the inverted views.
This is what defines the perfect and right enlightenment.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Constellation Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The Tathāgata has no place in which he dwells,
and yet he dwells in all kṣetras.
He goes forth to all lands
and is seen in every place.
The Buddha accords with the minds of beings
and everywhere manifests in every kind of body
as he attains enlightenment, turns the wheel of Dharma,
and then finally enters parinirvāṇa.
All buddhas are inconceivable.
Who could ever conceive of the Buddha?
Who could ever see the Rightly Enlightened One?
And who could ever manifest such ultimate supremacy?
All dharmas are in every case just suchness.
So too it is with all buddhas’ spheres of action.
There is not even one single dharma
that, in its suchness, undergoes any creation or destruction.
Beings engage in false discriminations
such as: “This is the Buddha” or “This is the world.”
For one who completely comprehends the nature of dharmas,
there is no buddha and there is no world.
The Tathāgata everywhere manifests directly before all,
causing them to be filled with faith and joy.
The essential substance of the Buddha cannot be apprehended,
and those beings also have nothing that they see.
If one is able with regard to the world
to leave all attachments far behind
and experience the joyous delight of the unimpeded,
then he will succeed in awakening to the Dharma.

Chapter 24 — The Tuṣita Heaven Palace Praise Verses
581
That which is manifested through the use of spiritual powers—
It is precisely this that is said to be the Buddha.
Yet, even if one searched throughout the three periods of time,
he would still be found to be nonexistent anywhere within them.
If one is able to know in this manner
the mind and all dharmas,
then one will know and see all
and swiftly succeed in becoming a tathāgata.
It is in words and speech that one may reveal
the sovereign masteries of all buddhas.
Still, the Rightly Enlightened One transcends all words and speech.
One simply avails oneself of words and speech to speak of him.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Dharma Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
One should rather have to constantly and fully endure
all of the sufferings in the world
than ever become separated from the Tathāgata
and then fail to witness his powers of sovereign mastery.
If there be any being
who has not yet resolved to realize bodhi,
if he but once succeeds in hearing the name of the Buddha,
he will then certainly be bound to realize bodhi.
Wherever there is anyone possessed of wisdom
who makes the resolve to attain bodhi for even one mind-moment,344
he will certainly succeed in becoming an unexcelled honored one.
One must take care to have no doubts about this.
The Tathāgata’s powers of sovereign mastery
are but rarely encountered even in countless kalpas.
If one but raises a single thought of faith in him,
then he will swiftly ascend to the unsurpassed enlightenment.345
Even if one were in every mind-moment
to make offerings to countless buddhas,
so long as one has not yet known the genuine Dharma,
these would still not qualify to be regarded as offerings.
If one but hears Dharma such as this—
all buddhas are born from this.
Even though one might endure countless sufferings,
do not ever abandon the practices leading to bodhi.
It is a single hearing of great wisdom
that is the Dharma that all buddhas have entered

582

The Flower Adornment Sutra
and by which, everywhere throughout the Dharma realm,
they have become the Master Guides of the three periods of time.
Even if one were to exhaust the bounds of future time,
roaming everywhere to all the buddha kṣetras,
so long as one does not seek this wondrous Dharma,
one would still never realize bodhi.
From the beginningless past on forward to the present,
beings have long drifted along and turned about in saṃsāra,
and yet still have not fully understood the genuine Dharma.
It is because of this that the buddhas have appeared in the world.
All of these dharmas are indestructible,
nor does there exist anyone who might be capable of destroying them.
The great light of those with the sovereign masteries
is everywhere revealed throughout the world.
The End of Chapter Twenty-Four

Chapter 25
The Ten Dedications
At that time, aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Vajra Banner
Bodhisattva entered the “bodhisattva wisdom light samādhi.”
Having entered this samādhi, from each of the ten directions, beyond
worlds as numerous as the atoms in ten myriads of buddha kṣetras,
buddhas as numerous as the atoms in ten myriads of buddha kṣetras,
all of whom were identically named “Vajra Banner,” then appeared
directly before him, whereupon they all praised him, saying:
It is good indeed, good indeed, Son of Good Family, that you have
been able to enter this bodhisattva wisdom light samādhi. Son of
Good Family, it is because of the joint assistance provided to you
by the spiritual powers of buddhas from each of the ten directions
as numerous as the atoms in ten buddha kṣetras, is also because of
the awesome spiritual powers arising from the power of Vairocana
Tathāgata’s past vows, is also because of the purity of your wisdom,
and is also because of the especially excellent roots of goodness of
the bodhisattvas that you have been enabled to enter this samādhi
and expound on the Dharma in order to enable all bodhisattvas:
To acquire pure fearlessness;
To possess unimpeded eloquence;
To enter the ground of unimpeded wisdom;
To dwell in the great mind of all-knowledge;
To fully develop inexhaustible roots of goodness;
To completely fulfill the dharmas of unimpeded purity;
To enter the Dharma realm of the universal gateways;
To manifest the spiritual powers of all buddhas;
To ensure the continuity of past mindfulness and wisdom;346
To acquire all buddhas’ protection of all their faculties;
To use countless gateways to extensively explain the many dhar­
mas;
To completely understand, absorb, uphold, and never forget all
the teachings that have been heard;
To accumulate all the roots of goodness of bodhisattvas;
To become fully accomplished in the world-transcending provi­
sions for the path;
To prevent the severance of the wisdom of all-knowledge;

584

The Flower Adornment Sutra
To instigate the generation of the great vows;
To explain the genuine meaning;
To completely know the Dharma realm;
To gladden all bodhisattvas;
To cultivate the same roots of goodness common to all buddhas;
and
To protect and preserve the lineage of all tathāgatas.
That is to say, [they have enabled you in this way] so that you will
expound on the ten dedications of all bodhisattvas. Son of the
Buddha, assisted by the awesome spiritual powers of the Buddha,
you should expound on these dharmas, doing so:
To acquire the protective mindfulness of the Buddha;
To dwell in the family of the buddhas;
To increase world-transcending meritorious qualities;
To acquire the light of the dhāraṇīs;
To enter the unimpeded Dharma of the Buddha;
To everywhere illuminate the Dharma realm with great light;
To accumulate the pure dharmas free of all faults;
To abide in the realm of vast wisdom; and
To acquire the unimpeded light of the Dharma.
Then the buddhas bestowed on Vajra Banner Bodhisattva:
Measureless wisdom;
Unimpeded eloquence;
Skillful means for distinguishing statements and meanings;
Unimpeded Dharma light;
A body the same as that of the Tathāgata;347
A pure voice possessed of countless different tones;
The bodhisattvas’ inconceivable samādhi of skillful contemplation;
The wisdom that dedicates all indestructible roots of goodness;
The perfection of skillful means in contemplating all dharmas; and
Uninterrupted eloquence in explaining all dharmas in all places.
Why did this occur? This was due to the power of the roots of good­
ness arising from entering this samādhi.
Then all the buddhas used their right hands to touch the crown of
Vajra Banner Bodhisattva’s head. After Vajra Banner Bodhisattva had
experienced their touching the crown of his head, he immediately
arose from that meditative absorption and told those bodhisattvas:
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has inconceivable
great vows by which he fills the Dharma realm and is everywhere
able to rescue and protect all beings. That is to say, he cultivates and

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
585
trains in the dedications of all buddhas of the past, the future, and
the present.
Sons of the Buddha, how many kinds of dedications does the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva have? Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva has ten kinds of dedications expounded on by all bud­
dhas of the three periods of time. What then are those ten? They are:
First, the dedication that saves all beings in the absence of any
conception of a being;
Second, the indestructible dedication;
Third, the dedication that is the same as that of all buddhas;
Fourth, the dedication that reaches everywhere;
Fifth, the dedication of an inexhaustible treasury of meritorious
qualities;
Sixth, the dedication of roots of goodness that penetrates the
equality of everyone;348
Seventh, the dedication that equally accords with all beings;
Eighth, the dedication that has the character of true suchness;
Ninth, the dedication of the unbound and unattached liberation;349
and
Tenth, the dedication that penetrates the measurelessness of the
Dharma realm.350
Sons of the Buddha, these are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s ten
kinds of dedications that all buddhas of the past, the future, and
the present have proclaimed, shall proclaim, and do now proclaim.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisat­
tva- mahāsattva’s dedication in which he saves all beings in the
absence of any conception of a being? Sons of the Buddha, when
this bodhisattva-mahāsattva practices dāna pāramitā, purifies śīla
pāramitā, cultivates kṣānti pāramitā, arouses vīrya pāramitā, enters
dhyāna pāramitā, and abides in prajñā pāramitā, great kindness, great
compassion, great sympathetic joy, and great equanimity, cultivat­
ing countless roots of goodness such as these, as he cultivates these
roots of goodness, he reflects in this way:
May these roots of goodness be everywhere able to benefit all
beings, enabling them all to attain purity, to achieve the ultimate,
and to remain forever apart from the measureless sufferings and
torments of the hells, the hungry ghosts, the animals, King Yama,
and other such circumstances.
When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva plants roots of goodness, he
dedicates his own roots of goodness in these ways:
May I become a shelter for all beings to enable them to avoid all
kinds of suffering circumstances;

586

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May I become a protector of all beings to enable them all to become
liberated from all afflictions;
May I become a refuge for all beings to enable them all to leave
behind all fears;
May I become a path for all beings to enable them to reach all-
knowledge;
May I become a source of peace for all beings to enable them to
find a place of ultimate peace and security;
May I become a light for all beings to enable them to acquire the
light of wisdom and extinguish the darkness of delusion;
May I become a torch for all beings to dispel all the darkness of
their ignorance;
May I become a lamp for all beings to enable them to dwell in the
station of ultimate purity;
May I become a guide for all beings to lead them to enter the true
Dharma; and
May I become a great guide for all beings to provide them with
unimpeded great wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all his
roots of goodness in these ways and thereby equally benefits all
beings, ultimately enabling them all to attain all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva guards and
performs dedications for those who are not his own relatives or
friends in a way that is the same as and no different from the man­
ner in which he does this for his own relatives and friends. Why
is this? This is because the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has penetrated
the same nature of all dharmas by which he does not raise so much
as a single thought conceiving of any being as not his own relative
or friend.
Even if some being has hostile or harmful intentions toward
the bodhisattva, the bodhisattva still looks on him with the eye of
kindness and remains forever free of anger. He everywhere serves
beings as a good spiritual friend who expounds on right Dharma
and enables them to take up its cultivation. Just as the great ocean
cannot be ruined by any of the many kinds of poisons, so too it is
with the bodhisattva, for even the many kinds of torments inflicted
on him by evil beings such as those who are foolish, devoid of wis­
dom, ungrateful, full of deep-seated poisonous hatred, arrogant
and self-important, mentally blind and unable to recognize good
dharmas—none of them are able to disturb him at all.
Just as when the sun351 rises in the world, it does not hide itself
and fail to appear simply because of the presence of those born

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
587
blind and unable to see it, because of the [mirage] city of the gand­
harvas, because of the hand of the asura,352 because of the trees grow­
ing on Jambudvīpa, because of towering cliffs or cavernous gorges,
or because of dust, fog, smoke, clouds, or the obstructions created
by any other things such as these. It does not simply hide itself and
fail to appear because of them, nor does it hide itself and fail to
appear because of the changes in the seasons. So too it is with the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva. He is possessed of great merit. His mind
is deep and vast. In his contemplation with right mindfulness, he
does not retreat or cringe. Rather, because of his zeal to achieve
the ultimate in meritorious qualities and wisdom, his mind pro­
duces the resolute aspiration to acquire the most supreme dharmas
and his Dharma light illuminates everything so that he perceives
the meaning of everything and possesses wisdom and sovereign
mastery in all gateways into the Dharma. He always cultivates
good dharmas to benefit all beings and never makes the mistake
of thinking of abandoning beings. He does not allow their corrupt
and evil natures, their wrong views and hate-muddled minds, or
the difficulty of training them to provoke him to precipitously reject
them and no longer cultivate dedications. Rather, he simply dons
the armor of the bodhisattva’s great vows as his adornment and
then proceeds to rescue and protect beings, never retreating from
doing this.
He does not retreat from the bodhisattva practices and abandon
the bodhisattva path because beings are ungrateful. He does not
abandon all of his reality-accordant roots of goodness due to dwell­
ing together in the same place with common people. And he does
not become disgusted with beings due to finding it hard to endure
the fact that they repeatedly commit evil deeds.
And why is this the case? Just as it is not for but a single purpose
that the sun353 rises and appears in the world, so too it is with the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva, for it is not solely for the sake of a single
being that he cultivates roots of goodness and then dedicates them
to anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi. Rather, it is for the sake of everywhere
rescuing and protecting all beings that he then cultivates roots of
goodness and dedicates them to anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
In this same way, it is not solely for the sake of purifying but a
single buddha kṣetra, not solely for the sake of faith in but a single
buddha, not solely for the sake of seeing but a single buddha, and
not solely for the sake of completely understanding but a single
dharma that he makes the vow to acquire great wisdom and dedi­
cates it to the realization of anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.

588

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Rather, it is to everywhere purify all buddha kṣetras, to every­
where develop faith in all buddhas, to everywhere serve and make
offerings to all buddhas, and in order to everywhere understand all
dharmas of the Buddha that he makes the great vow, cultivates all
roots of goodness, and dedicates them to anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva takes all dhar­
mas of the Buddha as his object in arousing the vast resolve and the
irreversible resolve to cultivate and accumulate for countless kalpas
the rare and difficult-to-acquire jewels of the mind equal to those
of all buddhas. It is in this way that the bodhisattva contemplates
all roots of goodness, develops the mind of pure faith, and becomes
solid in his possession of the great compassion as he performs gen­
uine dedications that are not merely verbal utterances, doing so for
the sake of all beings, doing so with an extremely profound mind, a
joyous mind, a pure mind, a supreme mind, a pliant mind, a mind of
kindness and compassion, a sympathetic mind, a mind that attracts
and protects beings, a beneficial mind, and a happy mind.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates
all his roots of goodness, he reflects in these ways:
May it be that, because of my roots of goodness, all beings in
all the destinies of rebirth will succeed in becoming purified,
in acquiring perfectly fulfilled meritorious qualities that cannot
be impeded, ruined, or exhausted, in always become revered, in
developing right mindfulness that never forgets, in acquiring res­
olute and decisive wisdom, in possessing measureless wisdom,
and in becoming perfectly full in their adornment with all the
meritorious qualities of body, mouth, and mind karma.
He also reflects in this manner:
May these roots of goodness enable all beings to serve and make
offerings to all buddhas, none doing so in vain. May they enable
them to develop pure and indestructible faith in the buddhas,
to listen to right Dharma, to cut off all doubts, to remember the
Dharma, to never forget it, and to cultivate it in accordance with
how it was taught. May they enable them to have thoughts of rev­
erential respect toward the Tathāgata, to engage in pure physical
actions, to become established in countless vast roots of good­
ness, to forever separate from poverty, and to become completely
fulfilled in the seven types of wealth.354 May they enable them
to always follow the buddhas in cultivation and training, to per­
fect countless supremely marvelous roots of goodness, to acquire
equal awakening and understanding, to abide in all-knowledge,
and to use the unimpeded eye to look on all beings with equal

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
589
regard. May they enable them to adorn their bodies with the
many signs, all of them free of flaws or deficiencies, to acquire
the pure and marvelous voice, to become perfectly fulfilled in the
meritorious qualities, to train all their faculties, to perfect the ten
powers, to become completely fulfilled in the mind of goodness,
and to have nothing on which they depend. And may they enable
all beings to acquire all the bliss of the buddha, to acquire the
countless stations [of the path], and to abide in the station where
the Buddha dwells.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva witnesses
all beings creating bad karma, undergoing all kinds of severe suf­
ferings, and then, because of these obstacles, becoming unable to
see the Buddha, unable to hear the Dharma, and unable to recog­
nize the Sangha, he then thinks: “I should substitute for all beings in
undergoing the many different kinds of sufferings in the wretched
destinies, thereby enabling them to attain liberation.”
When the bodhisattva undergoes excruciating sufferings in
this way, he then redoubles his energetic diligence and does not
abandon them, does not avoid them, is not terrified by them, is not
frightened by them, does not retreat from them, does not shrink
from them, and does not become weary. And why is this? This is
because, in accordance with the vows he has made, he decisively
aspires to take on the burdens of all beings and enable them to gain
liberation. At this time, the bodhisattva reflects in this way:
In accordance with their own karma, all beings drift along and
turn about in the stations of suffering and difficulty within the
realms of birth, aging, sickness, and death. Due to wrong views
and an absence of wisdom, they abandon all good dharmas. I
should rescue them and enable them to gain emancipation.
Moreover, all beings are entangled in the net of desire, are cov­
ered by a blanket of delusion, and are beset with defiled attach­
ments in all the realms of existence where they chase after and
never relinquish them. They enter the cage of suffering, engage
in the karmic actions of the māras, utterly exhaust all their merit
and wisdom, constantly cherish doubts and delusions, do not see
any place of peace and security, remain unaware of the path to
emancipation, abide in the ceaselessly turning wheel of saṃsāra,
and constantly drown in the mire of sufferings.
Having observed this, arousing the mind of great compassion
and the mind of great altruistic benefit, the bodhisattva wishes to
enable all beings to attain liberation. Using the dedication of all
roots of goodness, using the dedication of the vast resolve, using the

590

The Flower Adornment Sutra
dedications cultivated by the bodhisattvas of the three periods of
time, and using the dedications spoken of in the Great Dedications
Sutra, he wishes that all beings will everywhere attain purity and
will ultimately perfect the knowledge of all modes. He also reflects
in this way:
Whatever I cultivate, may it enable all beings to succeed in becom­
ing kings of unexcelled wisdom. It is not for myself that I seek
liberation. Rather it is only to rescue all beings and enable them
all to gain the resolve to attain all-knowledge, to cross beyond the
river of saṃsāra, and to become liberated from the many kinds of
sufferings.
He also reflects in this way:
On behalf of all beings, I should everywhere take on in full their
many kinds of sufferings, thereby enabling them to escape from
countless births and deaths and the great abyss of manifold suf­
ferings. To the very end of the kalpas of the future, I should every­
where take on all sufferings for all beings in all the wretched des­
tinies in all worlds while still always diligently cultivating roots
of goodness on behalf of beings. Why? I should rather solely take
on all these many sufferings myself than allow beings to fall into
the hells. I should instead substitute myself as a ransom payment
in their dangerous and difficult abodes of the hell realms, animal
realms, realms of King Yama, and so forth, thus buying their free­
dom and enabling the liberation of all the beings in the wretched
destinies.
He also reflects in this way:
May I be able to protect all beings, never forsake them, and remain
true to my words, remaining free of any falseness in this. Why?
It is in order to rescue and liberate all beings that I brought forth
the resolve to attain bodhi. It is not for myself that I seek the unex­
celled enlightenment. Nor is it to seek after the spheres of experi­
ence of the five desires or to acquire the various pleasures in the
three realms of existence that I cultivate the bodhi practices. Why
is that? Of all the pleasures of the world, there are none that are
not suffering, realms of the many māras, coveted by foolish people,
and criticized by all buddhas. All the disastrous states of suffering
arise because of them. All the hatred, anger, fighting, disputation,
and mutual injury and insult characteristic of the hells, hungry
ghosts, animals, and domains of King Yama—all the evils such as
these are caused by covetous attachment to the five desires. It is
such indulgent attachment to the five desires that causes beings
to stray far from the buddhas and become blocked from rebirth in

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
591
the heavens, how much the more so are they thereby blocked from
attaining anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva contemplates how worldlings’
greed for a little flavor from the desires causes them to endure mea­
sureless suffering. It is never for the sake of the pleasures of the
five desires that he pursues the unexcelled bodhi and cultivates the
bodhisattva practices. Rather, it is solely for the sake of the happi­
ness of all beings that he resolves to cultivate and completely fulfill
the great vows and strives to sever the bonds tying beings to all
their sufferings to enable them to gain liberation.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also reflects in
this manner:
I should dedicate roots of goodness in this way to enable all beings
to acquire the ultimate bliss, the bliss of benefit, the bliss of not
having to endure [sufferings], the bliss of quiescence, the bliss of
independence, the bliss of motionlessness, measureless bliss, the
bliss of neither relinquishing or retreating, undestroyed bliss, and
the bliss of all-knowledge.
He also reflects in this manner:
I should also serve all beings by becoming a teaching master who
trains them, a minister who directs their army, one who holds up
the torch of wisdom, one who shows the path to peace and secu­
rity, one who enables them to escape dangerous difficulties, and
one who uses excellent skillful means to enable them to under­
stand the truth. I should also serve them as the skillful ship cap­
tain of all-knowledge on the ocean of saṃsāra who takes beings
across and enables them to reach the far shore.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all his
roots of goodness in these ways, namely by according with what is
fitting in rescuing and protecting all beings, thereby enabling them
to escape from saṃsāra, to serve and make offerings to all buddhas,
to acquire the unimpeded wisdom of all-knowledge, to abandon the
many māras, to distance themselves from bad friends, to draw near
to all good bodhisattva friends, to extinguish all transgressions, to
perfect pure karma, and to completely fulfill the bodhisattva’s vast
conduct and vows and measureless roots of goodness.
Sons of the Buddha, after the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has rightly
dedicated all his roots of goodness, he reflects in this way:
It is not the case that, because the beings inhabiting the four con­
tinents are many, many suns rise. There rises only a single sun
which is able to everywhere illuminate all beings. Also, it is not

592

The Flower Adornment Sutra
due to light shining from their own bodies that beings know
whether it is day or night and then travel about observing things
and doing all kinds of actions. Rather, it is entirely due to the ris­
ing of the sun that they accomplish these endeavors. In this, that
solar orb is only one, not two.
So too it is with the bodhisattva-mahāsattva. When he cultivates
and accumulates roots of goodness and then dedicates them, he
reflects in this way: “Those beings are unable to rescue themselves.
How then could they rescue others? There is only me, this one per­
son.” He then resolves to cultivate and accumulate roots of good­
ness on his own, without the aid of companions, and then engages
in dedications such as these, in particular:
Because he wishes to extensively liberate all beings;
Because he wishes to everywhere illuminate all beings;
Because he wishes to instruct and guide all beings;
Because he wishes to awaken all beings;
Because he wishes to look after all beings;
Because he wishes to gather in all beings;
Because he wishes to develop all beings;
Because he wishes to gladden all beings;
Because he wishes to make all beings pleased and happy; and
Because he wishes to enable all beings to cut off their doubts.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also reflects in this
way:
I should be like the sun which everywhere illuminates all things
and, in doing so, does not seek any repayment of its kindness.
Even when there are beings who have evil [deeds they have done],
I must still be able to include them and never give up my vows
just because of this. I must never abandon all beings because of
the evil of a single being. Rather, I should just diligently cultivate
the dedication of roots of goodness and thus everywhere enable
all beings to gain happiness.
Even though these roots of goodness may be but few, in mak­
ing them, I should include all beings everywhere, making vast
dedications with a joyous mind. If one were to have roots of good­
ness and yet not wish to benefit all beings with them, this would
not truly qualify as a dedication. It is only by dedicating every
one of one’s roots of goodness to all beings everywhere that this
would qualify as dedication.
[Therefore he practices dedications such as these]:

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
593
Dedications to establish beings in the nature of dharmas, free of
any attachments;
Dedications in which one perceives that the essential nature of
beings is unmoving and unchanging;
Dedications in which the dedication has nothing it depends on
and nothing it seizes on;
Dedications in which one does not seize on the characteristics of
one’s roots of goodness;
Dedications in which one does not make discriminations regard­
ing the essential nature of their karmic rewards;
Dedications in which one does not become attached to the charac­
teristics of the five aggregates;
Dedications in which one does not damage355 the characteristics of
the five aggregates;
Dedications in which one does not seize on karmic deeds;
Dedications in which one does not seek karmic rewards;
Dedications in which one has no defiling attachment to causes
and conditions;
Dedications in which one does not make discriminations regard­
ing whatever arises from causes and conditions;
Dedications in which one is not attached to name and fame;
Dedications in which one is not attached to any particular place;
Dedications in which one is not attached to false dharmas;
Dedications in which one is not attached to the marks of any
being’s existence, the marks of the world’s existence, or the
marks of the mind’s existence;
Dedications in which one does not produce inverted thoughts,
inverted conceptions, or inverted views;
Dedications in which one is not attached to the path of words and
speech;
Dedications in which one contemplates the true nature of all
dharmas;
Dedications in which one contemplates the signs that are the same
for all beings;
Dedications in which one imprints all roots of goodness with the
seal of the Dharma realm; and
Dedications in which one contemplates all dharmas dispassion­
ately.
He understands that, just as all dharmas are nonexistent, so too is
this true of the planting of roots of goodness. He contemplates that,
just as all dharmas are non-dual, unproduced, and undestroyed,

594

The Flower Adornment Sutra
so too is this so of dedications. Using dedications of roots of good­
ness such as these, he cultivates pure counteractive dharmas.356 All
his roots of goodness accord with world-transcending dharmas. He
does not create dualistic concepts.
It is not through identification with karmic actions that he cul­
tivates all-knowledge, nor is it the case that it is apart from karmic
actions that he makes dedications directed toward all-knowledge. It
is not the case that [the attainment of] all-knowledge is a matter that
is identical with karmic actions. However, it is not the case that one
acquires all-knowledge apart from karmic actions. Because karmic
deeds are like light in their reflection of purity, karmic results are
also like light in their reflection of purity. Because karmic results
are like light in their reflection of purity, [the attainment of] the
wisdom of all-knowledge is also like light in its reflection of purity.
Having abandoned [the concepts of] the self and possessions of a
self and all the disturbances produced by thinking and discrimina­
tions [based on them], he completely understands in this way and
uses skillful means to dedicate all his roots of goodness. When the
bodhisattva practices dedications in this way, he always and inces­
santly liberates beings, yet does not dwell in any of the marks of
dharmas. Although he knows that all dharmas have no actions and
no retributions, he is still well able to bring forth every kind of kar­
mic result and yet is free of any contradictions in doing so. Using
expedient means such as these, he skillfully cultivates dedications.
When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva cultivates dedications in this
way, he remains free of all faults and becomes one who is praised
by the buddhas.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s first kind of dedication, the dedication that saves all
beings in the absence of any conception of a being.
At that time, Vajra Banner Bodhisattva surveyed the congregations
of the ten directions throughout the Dharma realm, penetrated the
meaning of these profound statements, and, with a measureless mind
that cultivated the supreme practices, that extended its great compas­
sion to include all beings everywhere, and that prevented the sever­
ance of the lineage of all tathāgatas of the three periods of time, he
entered the Dharma treasury of all buddhas’ meritorious qualities,
brought forth the Dharma body of all buddhas, and was well able to
evaluate the minds of all beings and know the ripeness of the roots
of goodness they had planted, whereupon, dwelling in the Dharma
body and yet still manifesting pure form bodies for their sakes, with

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
595
the assistance of the Buddha’s spiritual powers, he then spoke these
verses:
Cultivating the path for inconceivably many kalpas
with steadfast vigor and unimpeded resolve,
because he wishes to benefit the many kinds of beings,
he always seeks the dharmas of all buddhas’ meritorious qualities,
trains incomparably many people in the world,
purifies his mind to the point of extremely bright purity,
and resolves to everywhere rescue all sentient beings—
It is he who well enters the treasury of dedications.
Complete in the power of courageous vigor,
with astute and penetrating wisdom and a mind that is pure,
he everywhere rescues all the many kinds of beings
with a mind that is patient and never the least bit shaken.
His mind is well-established, without peer,
and his intentions are always pure and full of great delight.
In this way, he diligently cultivates for the sake of beings, and,
like the great earth, everywhere includes and accepts all beings.
It is not for himself that he seeks happiness,
but rather it is solely due to his wish to rescue and protect all beings.
In this way, he arouses the mind of great compassion
and swiftly succeeds in entering the ground of the unimpeded.
He gathers in all beings
throughout the worlds of the ten directions
and, in order to rescue them, skillfully abides in the resolve,
cultivating and training in all the dedications in this way.
In cultivating giving, he is filled with immense delight,
in preserving the precepts of purity, he remains free of transgressions,
and, in his courageous vigor, his mind remains unwavering.
He dedicates this to gaining the all-knowledge of the Tathāgata.
His mind is so vast as to be boundless.
Established in the power of patience, he is not the least bit shaken.
His dhyāna absorptions, extremely deep, are always fully illuminating.
And his wisdom is so sublime as to be inconceivable.
In all worlds throughout the ten directions,
He completely fulfills the cultivation of the pure practices
and then dedicates all such meritorious qualities as these
because he wishes to bring happiness to all sentient beings.
This great eminence diligently cultivates
all of the countless, boundless, and innumerable good karmic deeds,

596

The Flower Adornment Sutra
engaging in all such endeavors to be of benefit to beings
and to enable them to dwell in inconceivable and unexcelled wisdom.
In order to everywhere serve all beings,
he would even dwell in the hells for inconceivably many kalpas, and
in so doing, would still never have a thought of weariness or retreat,
as, with heroic valor, he always resolutely practices dedications.
He does not seek after forms, sounds, smells, or tastes,
nor does he crave for marvelous objects of touch.
Rather, it is only to rescue and liberate the many kinds of beings
that he always seeks unexcelled and supreme wisdom.
With wisdom as pure as empty space itself,
he cultivates the boundless practices of the great eminences.
All the practice dharmas such as the Buddha himself practiced,
that person always cultivates and trains in just as he did.
The great eminence travels to all worlds
where he is able to bring peace and security to all their many beings,
everywhere enabling them all to be filled with joyous delight
as he tirelessly cultivates the bodhisattva’s practices.
He extinguishes all the poisons of the mind
and contemplates and cultivates the most supreme wisdom.
He does not seek happiness for himself,
for he wishes only that beings would succeed in escaping suffering.
This person’s dedications reach the ultimate realization
and his mind is always pure and free of the many poisons.
All tathāgatas of the three times entrust their Dharma legacy to him
and he abides in the city of the unexcelled great Dharma.
He has never had any defiling attachment to physical forms.
So too with feeling, perception, formative factors, and consciousness.
His mind forever transcends the three realms of existence
and he dedicates all of his meritorious qualities.
All beings known and seen by the Buddha—
Without exception, he gathers them all in.
He vows that they will all be enabled to gain liberation
and cultivates for their sake, thus producing great joy.
In every mind-moment, his mind is constantly established
in wisdom so vast that it has no peer.
Free of delusion, his right mindfulness is always quiescent
and all of his karmic deeds are entirely pure.
As all those bodhisattvas abide in the world,
they are not attached to any inward or outward dharmas.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
597
They are like the wind which travels unhindered through space.
In his use of the mind, this great eminence is also just like this.
All of his physical actions are pure,
all of his speech remains free of fault,
and his mind always turns toward the Tathāgata.
Thus he is able to please all buddhas.
Throughout the countless lands of the ten directions,
wherever there are buddhas, he travels to visit them.
There, he gazes on those greatly compassionate bhagavats
and has none of them he does not revere, look up to, and serve.
His mind, always pure, has abandoned the many kinds of faults.
He everywhere enters the world, having nothing there that he fears.
Already abiding in the unexcelled path of the Tathāgata,
he also serves all in the three realms as a great pool of the Dharma.
He is energetically diligent in contemplating all dharmas
and accordingly reflects on existence and nonexistence.
It is in this way that he progresses to realization of the genuine truth
and is able to enter the extremely deep place free of contentiousness.
By these means he cultivates and succeeds in the solid path
which no being at all is able to destroy.
He is well able to completely penetrate the nature of all dharmas
and remain free of attachments throughout the three periods of time.
In this way, his dedications reach the far shore of perfection,
he everywhere enables all beings to abandon the many defilements,
he forever abandons all things on which one might depend,
and then succeeds in entering the ultimate station of independence.
The bodhisattva is able to distinguish and discourse
in the languages spoken by all beings,
adapting as he does so to the differences in each type,
doing so with a mind that is free of attachments and unimpeded.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva cultivates the dedications
of an ineffable number of meritorious qualities and skillful means
with which he is able to cause all the buddhas
in the worlds of the ten directions to proclaim his praises.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s indestructible dedication? Sons of the Buddha, this
bodhisattva-mahāsattva:
Attains indestructible faith in all tathāgatas of the past, future, and
present because he is able to serve all buddhas;
Attains indestructible faith in all bodhisattvas including even
those who have only just for a single mind-moment made the

598

The Flower Adornment Sutra
initial resolve to seek all-knowledge, this because he has vowed
to tirelessly cultivate all bodhisattvas’ roots of goodness;
Attains indestructible faith in all dharmas of the Buddha because
he has aroused a deep aspiration [to acquire them];
Attains indestructible faith in all the teachings of the buddhas
because he protects and preserves them;
Attains indestructible faith in all beings because, with the eye of
kindness, he looks on them with equal regard, dedicates his
roots of goodness to them, and everywhere benefits them;
Attains indestructible faith in all dharmas of purity because he
everywhere accumulates boundless roots of goodness;
Attains indestructible faith in the path of all bodhisattvas’ dedi­
cations because he has completely fulfilled all the especially
superior intentions;
Attains indestructible faith in all bodhisattva masters of the
Dharma because he conceives of all bodhisattvas as buddhas;
Attains indestructible faith in all buddhas’ sovereign mastery of
the spiritual superknowledges because of his deep faith in the
inconceivability of all buddhas; and
Attains indestructible faith in all bodhisattvas’ practice of skillful
means because he gathers together many different kinds of the
measureless and numberless spheres of experience associated
with the practices.
Sons of the Buddha, when this bodhisattva-mahāsattva establishes
himself in indestructible faith in this way, he plants all kinds of
measureless and boundless roots of goodness in relation to bud­
dhas, to bodhisattvas, to śrāvaka disciples, to pratyekabuddhas, to
teachings of all buddhas, to all beings, and to the many other differ­
ent kinds of objective spheres such as these and thereby causes the
bodhi resolve to grow ever greater, thus enabling his kindness and
compassion to become vast. He contemplates all with uniformly
equal regard and accordingly cultivates and trains in what all bud­
dhas have done, gathers in all the pure roots of goodness, enters the
genuine truth, accumulates the merit-producing practices, practices
giving with great kindness, cultivates all the meritorious qualities,
and contemplates the three periods of time as equal.
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all roots of goodness and
meritorious qualities such as these to the attainment of all-knowl­
edge and wishes to always be able to see the buddhas, draw near
to good spiritual friends, dwell together with the bodhisattvas,
and remain mindful of the quest for all-knowledge with a mind
that does not desist from this for even a moment. He absorbs and

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
599
upholds the Buddha’s teachings and diligently protects, teaches,
and ripens all beings.
With a mind always engaged in making dedications to the
world-transcending path, he makes offerings to and admiringly
serves all masters of the Dharma, completely understands all dhar­
mas, remembers them, never forgets them, and cultivates the great
vows, bringing them all to complete fulfillment.
In this way, the bodhisattva accumulates roots of goodness, per­
fects roots of goodness, brings about the growth of roots of good­
ness, contemplates roots of goodness, anchors his mindfulness on
roots of goodness, distinguishes roots of goodness, delights in roots
of goodness, cultivates roots of goodness, and establishes himself in
roots of goodness.
After the bodhisattva-mahāsattva accumulates all kinds of
roots of goodness in these ways, he uses the fruits acquired by
these roots of goodness in his cultivation of the bodhisattva prac­
tices. In each successive mind-moment, he sees countless buddhas
and, in accordance with what is fitting, he serves them and makes
offerings to them of asaṃkhyeyas of jewels, asaṃkhyeyas of flowers,
asaṃkhyeyas of garlands, asaṃkhyeyas of robes, asaṃkhyeyas of cano­
pies, asaṃkhyeyas of banners, asaṃkhyeyas of pennants, asaṃkhyeyas
of adornments, asaṃkhyeyas of attendants, asaṃkhyeyas of painted
and decorated grounds, asaṃkhyeyas of perfumes, asaṃkhyeyas of
powdered incenses, asaṃkhyeyas of mixed incenses, asaṃkhyeyas
of burning incenses, asaṃkhyeyas of instances of deep faith,
asaṃkhyeyas of instances of delight, asaṃkhyeyas of instances of pure
thought, asaṃkhyeyas of instances of honorific esteem, asaṃkhyeyas of
praises, asaṃkhyeyas of reverences, asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled thrones,
asaṃkhyeyas of flower thrones, asaṃkhyeyas of incense thrones,
asaṃkhyeyas of garlanded thrones, asaṃkhyeyas of sandalwood
thrones, asaṃkhyeyas of robe-laden thrones, asaṃkhyeyas of vajra
thrones, asaṃkhyeyas of maṇi jewel thrones, asaṃkhyeyas of thrones
adorned with jeweled silks, asaṃkhyeyas of jewel-colored thrones,
asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled walking meditation places, asaṃkhyeyas
of walking meditation places adorned with flowers, asaṃkhyeyas
of fragrant walking meditation places, asaṃkhyeyas of garlanded
walking meditation places, asaṃkhyeyas of robe-laden walking
meditation places, asaṃkhyeyas of walking meditation places inlaid
with jewels, asaṃkhyeyas of walking meditation places adorned
with all kinds of jeweled and embroidered silks, asaṃkhyeyas of
walking meditation places with tāla trees adorned with all kinds
of jewels, asaṃkhyeyas of walking meditation places with railings

600

The Flower Adornment Sutra
adorned with all kinds of jewels, asaṃkhyeyas of walking medita­
tion places covered by all kinds of suspended jeweled bell nets,
asaṃkhyeyas of palaces adorned with all kinds of jewels, asaṃkhyeyas
of palaces adorned with all kinds of flowers, asaṃkhyeyas of pal­
aces with all kinds of perfumes, asaṃkhyeyas of palaces decorated
with all kinds of garlands, asaṃkhyeyas of palaces of all kinds of
sandalwood, asaṃkhyeyas of palaces with treasuries of all kinds of
marvelous solid incense, asaṃkhyeyas of palaces made of all kinds
of vajra, asaṃkhyeyas of palaces adorned with every kind of maṇi
jewel, all of which are extraordinarily marvelous and superior even
to those of the heavens, asaṃkhyeyas of all kinds of trees adorned
with various jewels, asaṃkhyeyas of all different kinds of fragrant
trees, asaṃkhyeyas of trees adorned with all kinds of jeweled robes,
asaṃkhyeyas of all kinds of musical trees, asaṃkhyeyas of trees hung
with jewel adornments, asaṃkhyeyas of trees emanating wondrous
sounds, asaṃkhyeyas of trees adorned with endlessly pleasing jew­
els, asaṃkhyeyas of trees adorned with jeweled and embroidered silk
streamers, asaṃkhyeyas of trees adorned with jeweled chimes, and
asaṃkhyeyas of trees adorned with all kinds of flowers, perfumes,
banners, flags, garlands, and canopies, as well as other such trees
of these kinds which spread out and shaded these adorned palaces
from the light of the sun.
Those palaces also had asaṃkhyeyas of railing adornments,
asaṃkhyeyas of window adornments, asaṃkhyeyas of gateway adorn­
ments, asaṃkhyeyas of tower adornments, asaṃkhyeyas of crescent-
shaped window adornments, asaṃkhyeyas of awning adornments,
asaṃkhyeyas of suspended gold nets covering them from above,
asaṃkhyeyas of incenses circulating about and everywhere permeat­
ing the air, and asaṃkhyeyas of robes spread across their grounds.
Sons of the Buddha, for measureless, innumerable, and ineffa­
ble-ineffable numbers of kalpas, with a pure mind of veneration,
the bodhisattva-mahāsattva reverently presents all kinds of offer­
ings such as these to all buddhas, doing so constantly without ever
retreating from or resting from this practice.
Following upon the nirvāṇa of every one of the tathāgatas, he
reveres and makes offerings to the śarīra of them all in this very
same way, doing so:
To enable all beings to develop pure faith;
To enable all beings to accumulate roots of goodness;
To enable all beings to separate from all sufferings;
To enable all beings to develop vast understanding;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
601
To enable all beings to use great adornments to create adornments;
To enable them to use measureless adornments to create adorn­
ments;
To enable all that they do to achieve ultimate success;
To enable them to realize that it is very difficult to ever encounter
the buddhas’ appearance in the world;
To enable them to fulfill the measureless powers of the Tathāgata;
To enable them to adorn and make offerings to the stupas and
temples of the Buddha; and
To enable them to sustain and preserve the Dharma of all bud­
dhas.
In this way, he makes offerings to all buddhas of the present as well
as to their śarīra after they enter nirvāṇa. All the offerings he pres­
ents could never be completely described even in an asaṃkhyeya of
kalpas.
In this way, he cultivates and accumulates measureless meritori­
ous qualities, all for the sake of ripening all beings, doing so with­
out ever retreating, without ever resting, without ever tiring, with­
out any attachment, apart from any thinking, without depending
on anything, forever cutting off anything he might depend on, and
abandoning a self and possessions of a self. He imprints all gate­
ways of action with the imprint of reality-accordant Dharma, real­
izes the nonproduction of dharmas, and dwells where the Buddha
dwells. He imprints all his spheres of experience with the contem­
plation of their unproduced nature.
All buddhas regard with protective mindfulness dedications
associated with making the resolve [to attain bodhi, including]:
Dedications consistent with the nature of all dharmas;
Expedient dedications for entering uncreated dharmas to accom­
plish whatever is to be accomplished;
Expedient dedications for abandoning all conceptual attachments
to phenomena;
Dedications abiding in countless skillful means;
Dedications for forever transcending all realms of existence;
Expedient dedications for cultivating all practices without abid­
ing in signs;
Dedications for everywhere accumulating roots of goodness;
Vast dedications for everywhere purifying all bodhisattva prac­
tices;
Dedications for making the resolve to attain unexcelled bodhi;
Dedications for dwelling together with all roots of goodness; and

602

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Dedications for completely fulfilling the most superior resolute
faith.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all
roots of goodness in these ways, although he adapts to saṃsāra, he
still does not change. In seeking all-knowledge, he never retreats.
Even in the midst of all the realms of existence, his mind remains
unwavering, undisturbed, and able to liberate all beings. He
remains undefiled by conditioned dharmas and does not lose his
unimpeded wisdom. The causes and conditions associated with
the stations of bodhisattva practice are endless. None of the dhar­
mas of the world are able to either change him or cause him to be
moved. He completely fulfills the purification of all the pāramitās
and is able to perfect all the wisdom powers. It is in these ways that
the bodhisattva leaves the darkness of delusion, perfects the bodhi
resolve, manifests radiance, increases the growth of pure dharmas,
dedicates this to the supreme path, and completely fulfills the many
practices.
With a purified mind, he is well able to distinguish and com­
pletely understand all dharmas as being but manifestations of mind.
He knows that karmic actions are like conjurations, that karmic ret­
ributions are like [reflected] images,357 that all actions are like trans­
formations, that all dharmas produced of causes and conditions are
like echoes, and that all bodhisattva practices are like reflections.
He develops the pure Dharma eye free of all attachments, sees the
vast realm of the uncreated, realizes the quiescent nature, com­
pletely understands the non-duality of dharmas, realizes the true
character of dharmas, fulfills the bodhisattva practices, remains
free of any attachment to any signs, is well able to cultivate all the
actions involved in joint endeavors,358 never abandons the dharmas
of pristine purity, abandons all attachments, and abides in the prac­
tices free of attachment.
In this way, the bodhisattva engages in skillful contempla­
tive reflections free of delusion, does not contradict any dharmas,
does not violate karmic causality, clearly perceives reality, skill­
fully engages in making dedications, realizes the essential nature
of dharmas, and uses the power of skillful means to achieve kar­
mic results, enabling them to reach the far shore of perfection. He
contemplates all dharmas with wisdom and acquires the spiritual
superknowledges. He is effortless in developing the roots of good­
ness arising from his actions and is masterful in whatever he sets
his mind to.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
603
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates his roots of goodness in
this way because he wishes to liberate all beings, because he wishes
to prevent the severance of the lineage of the buddhas, because
he wishes to forever abandon the works of the māras, because he
wishes to see the realization of boundless all-knowledge, having
faith in it and never abandoning it, and because he wishes to leave
behind worldly spheres of experience and cut off the various kinds
of defilements. He also wishes that beings would gain pure wis­
dom, enter profound skillful means, escape the dharmas of saṃsāra,
gain the Buddha’s roots of goodness, forever cut off all the works
of the māras, everywhere imprint all their actions with the seal of
equanimity, resolve to progress into the knowledge of all modes,
and perfect all world-transcending dharmas.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the second of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications, the indestructible dedica­
tion. When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides in this dedication,
he is able to see all the numberless buddhas, perfects countless pure
and sublime dharmas, everywhere acquires the mind of impartial­
ity toward all beings, and becomes free of any doubts regarding
any of the dharmas. Assisted by all buddhas’ spiritual powers, he
conquers the many māras, forever abandons their deeds, succeeds in
being born into nobility, and fulfills the bodhi resolve. He acquires
unimpeded wisdom and, with understanding not arising from oth­
ers, he is well able to reveal and explain the meaning of all dharmas.
In accordance with the power of his thought, he is able to enter all
kṣetras, to everywhere illuminate beings, and to enable them all to
attain purity. Through the power of this indestructible dedication,
the bodhisattva-mahāsattva collects all roots of goodness and dedi­
cates them in this way.
Then Vajra Banner Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and,
assisted by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, spoke these verses:
The bodhisattva who has already acquired indestructible resolve
cultivates all the good karmic deeds
and is therefore able to please the buddhas.
Those who are wise then dedicate this.
He makes offerings to countlessly and boundlessly many buddhas,
practices giving, upholds precepts, and subdues the sense faculties,
all for the sake of his zeal to benefit all beings
and everywhere enable them all to attain purity.
All kinds of superior and marvelous incense and flowers,
countless different kinds of supremely fine robes,

604

The Flower Adornment Sutra
jeweled canopies, as well as adornments—
He offers all such things to all the tathāgatas.
In this way, he makes offerings to all the buddhas
for countlessly, numberlessly, and inconceivably many kalpas
during which he reveres and honors them, always rejoicing,
and without ever experiencing even one mind-moment of weariness.
He single-mindedly practices mindfulness of all buddhas,
those immensely brilliant lamps shining throughout all worlds,
whereupon, of all the tathāgatas throughout the ten directions,
none fail to appear directly before him as if seen with his own eyes.
For inconceivably and measurelessly many kalpas,
he practices many different kinds of giving with a tireless mind, and,
for hundreds of thousands of myriads of koṭīs of multitudes of kalpas,
he cultivates all the other kinds of good dharmas, all in this same way.
After those tathāgatas pass into nirvāṇa,
he is tireless in making offerings to their śarīra
and, for all of them, using many different marvelous adornments,
he erects inconceivably many stupas and temples.
He makes them in incomparable and most excellent shapes,
adorned with jewel treasuries and pure gold,
so towering in imposing height and size as to rival mountain kings,
creating them in countless hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of numbers.
Having made such offerings with pure-minded reverence,
he then also feels joyous delight and arouses beneficial intentions
to abide in the world for inconceivably many kalpas
to rescue and protect beings and enable them to gain liberation.
Completely aware that beings are all merely false perceptions,
he makes no discriminations with regard to any of them,
yet he is still able to skillfully distinguish beings’ individual faculties
and everywhere bestow benefit for the many kinds of beings.
The bodhisattva cultivates and accumulates all meritorious qualities
which are vast, most excellent, and incomparable.
Fully realizing that an essential nature does not exist in any of them,
he still resolutely dedicates them all in this way.
He contemplates all dharmas with the most supreme wisdom,
realizes that, among them all, not even one dharma is ever produced,
and employs skillful means such as these in cultivating dedications
of his measureless and inexhaustible meritorious qualities.
Using these skillful means, he causes his mind to become so pure
that in everything he does, he becomes the equal of all tathāgatas.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
605
Because the power of these skillful means is endless,
therefore his merit received as the result is ultimately inexhaustible.
He arouses the resolve to attain the unexcelled bodhi
that has nothing in the entire world upon which it depends
and that extends to all worlds throughout the ten directions
in which, in everything he does, he is entirely unimpeded.
All tathāgatas come forth into the world
because they wish to guide the minds of beings.
Contemplating them in accordance with the nature of their minds,
even searching to the ultimate, they still can never be apprehended.
All dharmas without exception
all enter into suchness and are devoid of any essential nature.
Dedicating with this purified eye,
he opens up those worlds’ prisons of births and deaths.
Although he is able to cause all realms of existence to become pure,
he still makes no discriminations regarding any realms of existence.
He realizes the nature of all realms of existence is utterly nonexistent
and is thus caused to feel joyous delight with a purified mind.
As, in any single buddha land, he has nothing he depends on,
so too is this so of all buddha lands.
He also does not have any defiling attachment to conditioned dharmas
and knows those dharmas’ nature has nothing to depend on.
In this way, he cultivates and succeeds in gaining all-knowledge,
and, in this way, he becomes adorned with unexcelled wisdom.
Because of this, all buddhas are therefore delighted.
These are the karmic works involved in the bodhisattva’s dedications.
The bodhisattva single-mindedly recalls all buddhas’
unexcelled wisdom and skillful expedient means, thinking:
“Just as the buddhas, in all things, have nothing they depend on,
may I cultivate and perfect these meritorious qualities.”
He single-mindedly focuses on rescuing and protecting everyone
and on enabling them to leave behind the many kinds of bad karma.
In this way, he benefits all the many kinds of beings,
attentively reflecting on them and never abandoning them.
Dwelling on the wisdom grounds, preserving and protecting Dharma,
he does not choose to enter nirvāṇa by resorting to the other vehicles.
Rather, he wishes only to gain the Buddha’s unexcelled path.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva practices skillful dedications.
He does not seize on any of the conditioned
and false phenomena about which beings speak.

606

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Although he does not depend upon the path of words and speech,
neither does he become attached to remaining free of words.
All tathāgatas throughout the ten directions
fully comprehend all dharmas without exception.
Although they realize they are all empty and quiescent,
they still do not arouse thoughts obsessed with emptiness.
With a single adornment, they adorn everything,
yet still refrain from making discriminations about dharmas.
It is in this way that they awaken the many beings
to all as devoid of any nature and devoid of anything to contemplate.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication that is the same as that of all buddhas?
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva accords with all
buddhas, the bhagavats, of the past, future, and present in his culti­
vation and training in the path of dedications. As he cultivates and
trains in this manner in the path of dedications, whenever he per­
ceives any form and so forth on through to whenever he perceives
any touchable or dharma as object of mind, whether it be beautiful
or repulsive, he does not either desire or dislike it. Rather his mind
achieves a state of sovereign mastery in which it remains free of any
fault, is vast, pure, joyful, pleased, and apart from all worrisome
afflictions. His mind abides in supple pliancy and all his sense fac­
ulties experience clarity and coolness.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva experi­
ences happiness of this sort, he then brings forth another thought in
which he dedicates it to all buddhas, thinking:
May it be that, because of the roots of goodness I have now
planted, I may enable the bliss of the buddhas to grow ever more
superior, namely:
The inconceivable bliss in which the buddhas dwell;
The peerless bliss of the buddhas’ samādhis;
The limitless bliss of their great kindness and compassion;
The bliss of all buddhas’ liberations;
The bliss of their boundless great spiritual superknowledges;
The bliss of their most ultimately revered great sovereign
masteries;
The bliss of their vast, ultimate, and measureless powers;
The bliss of their quiescence apart from all sensory aware­
ness;
The bliss of their abiding in the unimpeded station’s constant
right meditative concentration; and
The unchanging bliss of engaging in non-dual practice.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
607
Sons of the Buddha, after the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all
his roots of goodness to the buddhas, he then also dedicates this
very goodness to the bodhisattvas, that is:
To enable those who have not yet fulfilled their vows to succeed in
completely fulfilling them;
To enable the minds of those whose minds have not yet become
purified to become purified;
To enable those who have not yet completely fulfilled the pāramitās
to succeed in completely fulfilling them;
To establish them in the vajra bodhi resolve;
To assist them in gaining irreversibility in their progress toward
all-knowledge;
To enable them to never abandon great vigor in protecting the
gateways to bodhi and all their roots of goodness;
To enable all beings to abandon pride in themselves, arouse the
bodhi resolve, and thus fulfill all their wishes;
To establish them in the stations in which all bodhisattvas dwell;
To assist them in acquiring the bodhisattva’s bright and sharp fac­
ulties; and
To assist them in cultivating roots of goodness and realizing all-
knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, after the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has dedicated
his roots of goodness to the bodhisattvas in this way, he then also
dedicates them to all beings, wishing that, by doing so, the roots of
goodness of those beings including even those from the most minor
acts such as seeing the Buddha, hearing the Dharma, or revering
the ārya Sangha for only the instant of a finger snap may then allow
them to leave behind all their obstacles, so that:
They will achieve complete fulfillment of mindfulness of the
Buddha;
They will become mindful of the Dharma’s skillful means;
They will become mindful of the venerability of the Sangha;
They will never become separated from the ability to see the
Buddha;
They will attain purity of mind;
They will acquire the Dharma of all buddhas;
They will accumulate measureless virtue;
They will purify the spiritual superknowledges;
They will abandon thoughts of doubt in the Dharma; and
They will dwell in reliance on the teachings.

608

The Flower Adornment Sutra
And just as he makes dedications for the sake of beings, so too does
he also make dedications for the benefit of śrāvaka disciples and pra­
tyekabuddhas, doing so in these same ways.
Moreover, in so doing, he wishes that all beings will forever
leave behind the hell realms, the hungry ghost realms, the animal
realms, the realms of King Yama, and all the other such wretched
stations of existence, wishing too that they will further develop the
resolve to attain unexcelled bodhi, that they will focus their minds
on the diligent pursuit of the knowledge of all modes, that they will
forever refrain from ever slandering the right Dharma of all bud­
dhas, that they will acquire the happiness of the Buddha, that they
will acquire purity of body and mind, and that they will realize
all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, it is entirely because of great vows that the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s roots of goodness, in their initiation, are
rightly initiated, in their accumulation, they are rightly accumu­
lated, and in their increasing, they are rightly increased to the point
that they are all caused to become vast and completely fulfilled.
Sons of the Buddha, even when abiding as a householder within
the home with spouse and children, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva
never even briefly relinquishes the resolve to attain bodhi. With
right mindfulness, he reflects on the realm of all-knowledge, liber­
ates himself, and liberates them by enabling them to attain its ulti­
mate realization.
Using excellent skillful means, he teaches those in his own fam­
ily, enables them to enter the wisdom of the bodhisattva, and enables
them to become ripened and gain liberation. Even though he dwells
together with them, his mind remains free of attachments. He relies
on his original great compassion as he abides in the householder’s
life and, because of the mind of kindness, accords with his wife and
children in a way that represents no obstacle to the bodhisattva’s
path of purification.
Although the bodhisattva-mahāsattva may abide in the house­
hold life in which he works at various occupations, he still never
even briefly abandons his resolve to attain all-knowledge, that is to
say, whether it be when donning his clothing, tasting flavors, tak­
ing medicines, washing his face and rinsing out his mouth, apply­
ing skin salves, turning around to look at something, walking,
standing, sitting, or lying down, in his physical, verbal, and mental
actions, whether asleep or awake—in all such actions as these, his
mind is always dedicating them to the path of all-knowledge. He
concentrates on this and reflects on this, having no time in which
he abandons this.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
609
Because he wishes to benefit beings, he establishes himself in
measureless great vows to attain bodhi, gathers numberless vast
roots of goodness, diligently cultivates every kind of goodness,
everywhere rescues everyone, forever abandons every form of arro­
gance or neglectfulness, and proceeds with decisive resolve toward
the ground of all-knowledge, never intending to go in the direction
of any other path. He always contemplates the bodhi of all buddhas,
forever abandons all defiled dharmas, cultivates what all bodhisat­
tvas train in, remains free of obstacles to the path to all-knowledge,
dwells on the ground of all-knowledge, enjoys recitation and prac­
tice of the teachings, and uses measureless wisdom to accumulate
all kinds of roots of goodness.
His mind refrains from affectionate fondness for anything in
the world and also refrains from any defiled attachment to any of
the practices in which he engages. He single-mindedly absorbs and
upholds the teaching dharmas of all buddhas.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva resides within the house­
holder’s life, everywhere accumulates roots of goodness, enables
them to grow, and dedicates them to the unexcelled bodhi of the
buddhas.
Sons of the Buddha, at that time, even whenever the bodhisattva
so much as gives a single morsel or grain of food to some animal,
he makes this wish:
May it be that this will enable these beings to abandon the path
of animal rebirth, benefiting them, making them happy, and ulti­
mately bringing about their liberation by which they forever cross
beyond the ocean of suffering, forever extinguish feelings of suf­
fering, forever become rid of the mass of sufferings, and forever
cut off sensations of suffering, accumulation of sufferings, actions
producing suffering, the causes of suffering, the roots of suffer­
ing, and all circumstances involving suffering. May it be that all
those beings will succeed in abandoning all such situations.
In this way, the bodhisattva single-mindedly focuses his mindful­
ness on all beings and, taking their roots of goodness as what is
most important, dedicates them on their behalf to the attainment
of the knowledge of all modes. From the time the bodhisattva
first resolves to attain bodhi, he everywhere gathers in beings as
he cultivates roots of goodness and dedicates them all, wishing to
enable them to forever leave the wilderness of saṃsāra, to acquire all
tathāgatas’ unimpeded happiness, to escape from the ocean of afflic­
tions, and to cultivate the path of the Buddha’s Dharma.

610

The Flower Adornment Sutra
With a mind of kindness that pervades and fills all places and a
power of compassion that is vast, he everywhere enables everyone
to acquire pure happiness, to preserve their roots of goodness, to
draw close to the Buddha’s Dharma, to escape from the realms of
the māras, to enter the realm of the Buddha, to cut off the seeds of
worldly existence, to plant the seeds for becoming a tathāgata, and
to dwell within the Dharma that is the same in all three periods of
time. The bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all such roots of good­
ness he has planted, will plant, and now plants and also has this
additional thought:
Just as the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the past practiced rever­
ing and making offerings to all buddhas, liberating beings, and
enabling them to forever gain emancipation, diligently cultivating
all roots of goodness, and then dedicating them all, doing so with­
out any attachment, that is to say, without relying on form, while
not attaching to feeling, without inverted perceptions, by not cre­
ating karmic formative factors, by not seizing on consciousnesses,
by relinquishing the six sense bases, by not dwelling in worldly
dharmas, and by delighting in transcending the world, doing so
by knowing all dharmas as like empty space, as having no place
from which they come, as not produced and not destroyed, as
devoid of reality, and as free of defiling attachment, by abandon­
ing all discrimination-based views, by remaining unmoved and
unturned, by never erring, by never being damaged, by dwelling
in the apex of reality, in the signless, apart from signs, in what has
only a single sign, by deeply entering in these ways the nature of
all dharmas, by always delighting in cultivating the roots of good­
ness of the universal gateways, and by seeing the congregations of
all buddhas—just as all those tathāgatas of the past dedicated their
roots of goodness, so too do I also practice dedications, under­
standing dharmas such as these, realizing dharmas such as these,
relying on dharmas such as these, resolving to cultivate, to not
contradict the marks of dharmas, to know what is cultivated as
like a conjuration, as like a reflection, as like the moon reflected in
the water, as like images in a mirror, and as mere appearances cre­
ated by the conjunction of causes and conditions, doing so all the
way to the point of reaching the ultimate ground of the Tathāgata.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also has this
thought:
Just as, when all buddhas of the past cultivated the bodhisattva
practices, they dedicated all their roots of goodness in this way,
and just as those of the future shall do so and those of the present

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
611
now also do so, so too should I now also resolve, in the same way
as all those buddhas, to dedicate all roots of goodness with fore­
most dedications, supreme dedications, the most supreme dedica­
tions, superior dedications, unexcelled dedications, incomparable
dedications, dedications unequaled by the unequaled, peerless
dedications, unmatched dedications, honorable dedications, mar­
velous dedications, equal dedications, right and straightforward
dedications, dedications possessed of great meritorious qualities,
vast dedications, good dedications, pure dedications, dedications
for abandoning what is wrong, and dedications for not following
what is wrong.
After the bodhisattva has used his roots of goodness to practice
right dedications in these ways, he perfects the purification of phys­
ical, verbal, and mental deeds, dwells in the bodhisattvas’ stations,
remains free of all faults, cultivates good deeds, abandons physical
and verbal bad actions, maintains a mind free of flaws or defile­
ments, cultivates the acquisition of all-knowledge, dwells in the vast
mind, realizes all dharmas have nothing that they do, abides in the
world-transcending Dharma, remains unsullied by worldly dhar­
mas, distinguishes and completely knows the countless varieties
of karmic actions, perfects the skillful expedient means for mak­
ing dedications, and forever extricates the roots of all grasping and
attachment.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the third of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications, the dedication that is the
same as that of all buddhas. The bodhisattva-mahāsattva who
abides in the use of this dedication deeply enters into the works of
all tathāgatas, progresses toward the acquisition of the supremely
marvelous meritorious qualities of the Tathāgata, enters the realm
of profound and pure wisdom, never abandons the works of all bod­
hisattvas, is well able to distinguish clever and marvelous skillful
means, enters the deep Dharma realm, well knows the sequences
involved in the bodhisattva’s cultivation, enters the lineage of the
buddhas, and uses clever skillful means to distinguish and com­
pletely know all the measurelessly and boundlessly many dharmas.
Although he repeatedly manifests bodies born into the world, his
mind remains free of any attachment to worldly dharmas.
At that time, aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Vajra Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
All those bodhisattva-mahāsattvas
cultivate the dharmas of dedication of the buddhas of the past
and also train in what is practiced
by all the Master Guides of both the future and the present.

612

The Flower Adornment Sutra
They find happiness in all their spheres of experience,
are praised by all the buddhas, the tathāgatas,
and use their vast radiance and purified eyes
in making dedications to realization of the greatly astute wisdom.
All of the bodhisattva’s different kinds of physical sense faculty bliss
as well as that of his eyes, ears, nose, and tongue—
All such measureless and supremely sublime bliss,
he dedicates it all to all the Most Supreme Ones.
All the many good dharmas of the world
as well as those perfected by all tathāgatas
are all without exception collected by him
and then entirely used to joyfully accord with and benefit beings.
All the different kinds of things in which those in the world rejoice
are now used here in making dedications for the sake of beings,
wishing thereby to enable all the many beings
to completely fulfill all the bliss of the Lion Among Men.
The many different kinds of bliss known and seen
by all tathāgatas throughout all lands—
He wishes to enable all beings to acquire them all
and then become great bright lamps who illuminate the world.
The supremely marvelous types of bliss acquired by the bodhisattva
are all dedicated to the many kinds of beings.
Although he dedicates them to benefit the many kinds of beings,
he still has no attachment to his dedications.
As the bodhisattva cultivates these dedications,
he arouses his measureless mind of great compassion:
“May I be able to cultivate and completely fulfill
all the qualities of dedication like those cultivated by the Buddha.
The sublime bliss of the vehicle leading to all-knowledge
such as has been perfected by all the Most Supreme Ones,
as well as the measureless bliss arising from the bodhisattva practices
that I have practiced in the world,
the peaceful bliss when manifesting entry into the many destinies,
and the quiescent bliss born of constantly guarding sense faculties—
All of these I dedicate to the many kinds of beings,
to enable them all to cultivate and perfect unexcelled wisdom.”
It is not that body, speech, or mind themselves are his karma,
nor is it the case that it exists apart from these.
He only uses them as expedients to extinguish delusion’s darkness.
It is in this way that he cultivates and realizes unexcelled wisdom.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
613
All the practices and actions cultivated by the bodhisattva,
his accumulation of measureless supreme meritorious qualities,
his birth in the family of the buddhas by following after the Tathāgata,
and his undisturbed quiescence—he rightly dedicates them all.
He attracts and takes in all beings
in all worlds throughout the ten directions
and dedicates all his roots of goodness to them,
wishing to enable them to fully attain peaceful and secure bliss.
He does not seek to acquire benefit for himself.
Rather, he wishes to enable everyone to be happy.
He never even briefly gives rise to a mind of conceptual proliferation,
for he only contemplates all dharmas as empty and devoid of self.
All those true sons of the Buddha he has seen together with
the countless Most Supreme Ones throughout the ten directions—
He dedicates all his roots of goodness to them,
wishing to enable them to swiftly realize unexcelled enlightenment.
With a mind of equal regard for them all without exception,
he gathers in all sentient beings residing in all worlds,
thinking: “May it be that, through all the good works I have practiced,
those beings may be enabled to swiftly accomplish buddhahood.”
“As for all the countlessly and boundlessly many great vows
expounded on by the Unexcelled Guides,
may all sons of the Buddha be able to attain purity and,
adapting to being’s mental dispositions, completely fulfill them all.”
Contemplating all worlds throughout the ten directions,
he bestows his meritorious qualities on them all,
wishing to enable them all to possess marvelous adornments.
In this way, the bodhisattva trains in making dedications.
His mind is not devoted to the assessment of dual dharmas,
for he only constantly fully comprehends dharmas as non-dual.
As to whether dharmas are dual or are non-dual,
he remains ultimately free of any attachments in such matters.
All the worlds throughout the ten directions
are but discriminations in beings’ perceptions.
Whether by perception or non-perception, nothing is apprehensible.
It is in this way that he fully comprehends all perceptions.
If those bodhisattvas have already achieved purity in physical deeds,
then their minds are pure and free of flaws or defilements.
If their verbal karma has already become purified and free of all faults,
one should know that their minds are pure and free of all attachments.

614

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He is single-minded in right mindfulness of the buddhas of the past
and also bears in mind all the Master Guides of the future
as well as the present’s most revered ones among devas and humans
as he trains himself in all the dharmas they have taught.
All tathāgatas throughout the three periods of time
possess wisdom, clear comprehension, and unimpeded minds.
Because he wishes to be able to benefit beings,
he dedicates his many accumulated works so they may gain bodhi.
Those of foremost wisdom, vast wisdom,
wisdom free of falseness, wisdom free of inverted views,
equal and genuine wisdom, pure wisdom,
and most supreme wisdom all explain this in this way.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication that reaches everywhere? Sons of the
Buddha, when this bodhisattva-mahāsattva is cultivating all roots
of goodness, he reflects in this manner:
May the power of the meritorious qualities associated with these
roots of goodness reach everywhere. Just as the apex of reality has
no place it does not reach as it reaches all things, reaches all worlds,
reaches all beings, reaches all lands, reaches all dharmas, reaches
all of empty space, reaches all three periods of time, reaches
all that is either conditioned or unconditioned, and reaches the
sounds of all speech, may it be that these roots of goodness also in
this same way everywhere reach the places in which the tathāgatas
dwell to serve as an offering to all buddhas of the three periods of
time, facilitating the complete fulfillment of what was vowed by
the buddhas of the past, facilitating the perfectly replete adorn­
ments of all buddhas of the future, and enabling all buddhas of
the present as well as their lands and congregations at their sites
of enlightenment to everywhere fill empty space and the Dharma
realm.
May it be that, due to the great awesome power of resolute
faith, due to the unimpeded nature of vast wisdom, and due to
the dedication of all roots of goodness, that this will then provide
offerings equal to the offerings of the devas which completely fill
all the countlessly and boundless many worlds.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also has this
thought:
The buddhas, the bhagavats, are everywhere present throughout
all of empty space and the Dharma realm in the ineffable num­
ber of all world systems and worlds throughout the ten directions
created by the many different kinds of karma, including in the

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
615
ineffable number of buddha lands, in buddha realms, in many
different kinds of worlds, in measureless worlds, in worlds with­
out boundaries, in swirling worlds, in laterally facing worlds, in
upright worlds, in inverted worlds, and in all the other kinds of
worlds such as these in which they appear and dwell for the dura­
tion of their life spans during which they display many different
kinds of spiritual superknowledges and transformations. There
are bodhisattvas there who, for the sake of beings capable of being
taught, use the power of their supreme understanding to manifest
as tathāgatas who appear in the world and, with their wisdom that
extends to all places, they everywhere reveal the tathāgatas’ mea­
sureless masterful spiritual powers.
The Dharma body pervasively reaches all places without dis­
tinction and everywhere equally enters the entire Dharma realm.
The tathāgata-garbha body is neither produced nor destroyed, yet,
through the use of skillful means, they appear everywhere in the
world, realizing the true nature of dharmas because they have
transcended all things, attaining irreversibility because of their
unimpeded power, and because they have been born into the
lineage of the tathāgatas possessed of unimpeded vision and vast
awe-inspiring qualities.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva wishes through
using all the roots of goodness he has planted to make offerings to
all tathāgatas, offerings consisting of the many marvelous flowers
as well as the many kinds of marvelous incense, garlands, cano­
pies, banners, pennants, robes, lamps, candles, and all other kinds
of adornments, also making such offerings to buddha images, stu­
pas, and temples in this same way. Using these roots of goodness,
he performs dedications such as these, that is: undistracted dedi­
cations, single-minded dedications, self-initiated dedications, rev­
erential dedications, unwavering dedications, nonabiding dedica­
tions, independent dedications, dedications free of any conception
of the existence of any being, dedications free of any agitated or
competitive thoughts, and quiescent-minded dedications. He then
also reflects in this way:
Throughout the Dharma realm and the realm of empty space and
throughout all kalpas of the past, future, and present, all the bud­
dhas, the bhagavats, acquire all-knowledge and become enlight­
ened. With countless names, each different, at many different
times, they manifest attainment of right enlightenment and they
all dwell for the duration of their life span, to the very end of future
time. Every one of them takes the Dharma realm’s adornments as

616

The Flower Adornment Sutra
their own adornments. The congregations at their sites of enlight­
enment are pervasively present throughout all lands of the entire
Dharma realm. As befits the time, they appear in the world and
perform the works of the buddhas.
I everywhere dedicate my roots of goodness to all the above-
mentioned buddhas, all the tathāgatas such as these, wishing to be
able to present reverential offerings to them all of numberless fra­
grant canopies, numberless fragrant banners, numberless fragrant
pennants, numberless fragrant awnings, numberless fragrant
nets, numberless fragrant images, numberless fragrant lights,
numberless fragrant flaming lights, numberless fragrant clouds,
numberless fragrant seats, numberless fragrant walking medita­
tion grounds, numberless fragrant dwelling places, numberless
fragrant worlds, numberless fragrant mountains, numberless
fragrant oceans, numberless fragrant rivers, numberless fragrant
trees, numberless fragrant robes, numberless fragrant lotus flow­
ers, numberless fragrant palaces, measureless floral canopies, and,
to extensively describe it, even up to measurelessly many flower-
laden palaces and boundlessly many garland-adorned canopies,
and, to extensively describe it, even up to boundlessly many gar­
land-adorned palaces, incomparably many perfumed canopies,
and, to extensively describe it, even up to incomparably many per­
fumed palaces, and innumerably many powdered incense cano­
pies, and, to extensively describe it, even up to innumerable pow­
dered incense palaces and indescribably many robe-decorated
canopies, and, to extensively describe it, even up to indescribably
many robe-decorated palaces and inconceivably many jeweled
canopies, and, to extensively describe it, even up to inconceiv­
ably many jeweled palaces and immeasurably many lamplight
canopies, and, to extensively describe it, even up to immeasurably
many lamplight palaces and ineffably many adornment canopies,
and, to extensively describe it, even up to ineffably many adorn­
ment palaces and an ineffable-ineffable number of maṇi jewel
canopies and an ineffable-ineffable number of maṇi jewel banners,
and, of this same sort, maṇi jewel pennants, maṇi jewel awnings,
maṇi jewel nets, maṇi jewel images, maṇi jewel lights, maṇi jewel
flaming lights, maṇi jewel clouds, maṇi jewel seats, maṇi jewel
walking meditation grounds, maṇi jewel dwelling places, maṇi
jewel kṣetras, maṇi jewel mountains, maṇi jewel oceans, maṇi jewel
rivers, maṇi jewel trees, maṇi jewel robes, maṇi jewel lotus flow­
ers, and maṇi jewel palaces, all of which are present in ineffable-
ineffable numbers. In this same way, in every one of those realms,
there are numberless railings, numberless palaces, numberless

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
617
towers, numberless gateways, numberless crescent-shaped open­
ings, numberless enemy-repelling portals, numberless windows,
numberless pure jewels, and numberless adornments.
May it be that, [by these dedications], all those worlds are
caused to become purified and all those beings are enabled to
gain emancipation, to dwell on the ground of the ten powers, and
to acquire unimpeded Dharma light with respect to all dharmas.
May all beings be enabled to perfect their roots of goodness, to
become trained, to have minds as measureless as the realms of
empty space, to go to all kṣetras and yet have no place to which
they go, to enter all lands, making gifts of all good dharmas, to
always succeed in seeing the Buddha, to plant all kinds of roots of
goodness, to achieve success in the Great Vehicle, to refrain from
attachment to any dharmas, to perfect the many kinds of good­
ness, to establish themselves in measureless practices, to every­
where enter all the boundless Dharma realms, to perfect all bud­
dhas’ powers of the spiritual superknowledges, and to acquire the
Tathāgata’s wisdom of all-knowledge.
Just as non-self comprehensively includes all dharmas, may
my own [dedications of] roots of goodness also do so by:
Comprehensively including all buddhas, the tathāgatas, with­
out exception by making offerings to them all;
Comprehensively including all the measureless dharmas by
being able to be unimpeded in awakening to and entering
them all;
Comprehensively including the community of all bodhisat­
tvas by ultimately developing the same roots of goodness
as theirs;
Comprehensively including all the bodhisattva practices by
completely fulfilling them all through the power of origi­
nal vows;
Comprehensively including the Dharma light of all bod­
hisattvas by being unimpeded in fully comprehending all
dharmas;
Comprehensively including all buddhas’ powers of the spiri­
tual superknowledges by completely perfecting measure­
less roots of goodness;
Comprehensively including all buddhas’ powers, fearless­
nesses, and development of the immeasurable minds by
fulfilling them all;
Comprehensively including the bodhisattva’s samādhis,
types of eloquence, and dhāraṇi gateways by being well
able to completely illuminate the dharma of non-duality;

618

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Comprehensively including all buddhas’ skillful expedient
means by revealing the Tathāgata’s great spiritual powers;
Comprehensively including all buddhas of the three periods
of time, their descent to take birth, attainment of enlight­
enment, turning of the wheel of right Dharma, training
beings, and entering pārinirvāṇa, this by respectfully mak­
ing offerings to all of them everywhere;
Comprehensively including all worlds of the ten directions
by accomplishing the ultimate purification of all buddha
kṣetras;
Comprehensively including all vast kalpas by appearing
within them, ceaselessly cultivating the bodhisattva prac­
tices;
Comprehensively including the beings in all the destinies
of rebirth by manifesting the taking on of births in all of
them;
Comprehensively including all the realms of beings by
completely fulfilling the practices of Samantabhadra
Bodhisattva;
Comprehensively including all delusions and habitual kar­
mic propensities by using skillful means to enable the
purification of them all;
Comprehensively including the countless different faculties
of all beings by completely knowing them all;
Comprehensively including the understandings and desires
of all beings by enabling them to abandon defilement and
attain purity;
Comprehensively including all the practices used to teach
beings by manifesting bodies adapted to whatever is fit­
ting for them;
Comprehensively including all paths used in responding to
beings by entering all realms of beings; and
Comprehensively including the nature of all tathāgatas’ wis­
dom by protecting and preserving the teachings of all
buddhas.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsatttva is dedicating
all his roots of goodness in these ways, he uses the inapprehensibil­
ity of anything at all as a skillful means. He does not distinguish
karmic rewards within actions and does not distinguish actions
within karmic rewards. Although he remains free of such discrimi­
nations, he still everywhere enters the Dharma realm.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
619
Although he has nothing whatsoever that he does, he still con­
stantly abides in roots of goodness. Although he has nothing what­
soever he initiates, he still diligently cultivates supreme dharmas.
He does not place trust in any dharma and yet he is still able to
deeply enter them. Although he does not attribute existence to dhar­
mas, he still completely knows and perceives them. Whether they
be created or uncreated, they are all inapprehensible. He knows the
nature of all dharmas is for them to never have any inherent exis­
tence of their own. Although he perceives all dharmas, there is still
nothing at all that he perceives. He everywhere knows everything
and yet has nothing whatsoever that he knows.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva fully comprehends spheres
of experience and knows that all dharmas take causes and condi­
tions as their origin. He sees the Dharma body of all buddhas and,
in so doing, he arrives at the defilement-transcending apex of reality
of all dharmas. He completely understands the world as being like
magical transformations and clearly comprehends beings in terms
of but a single dharma, that of having a non-dual nature. [Even so],
he does not dispense with the use of skillful expedient means in the
realm of karmic actions. In the realm of conditioned dharmas, he
reveals the dharma of the unconditioned, and yet, in so doing, does
not extinguish their conditioned signs. In the realm of uncondi­
tioned dharmas, he reveals conditioned dharmas and yet does not
make discriminations regarding their sign of being unconditioned.
It is in this way that the bodhisattva contemplates all dharmas as
ultimately quiescent.
He completely develops all pure roots of goodness and yet still
arouses the resolve to rescue and protect beings. Through his wis­
dom, he possesses a clearly penetrating comprehension of the ocean
of all dharmas and constantly delights in cultivating the dharmas
by which one abandons delusion. He has already completely devel­
oped the world-transcending meritorious qualities and no longer
cultivates or trains in worldly dharmas. He acquires the purified
wisdom eye, abandons the cataracts of delusion, and uses excellent
skillful means in cultivating the path of dedications.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates
all his roots of goodness in these ways, he accords with the mind
of all buddhas. He purifies all buddha lands, teaches and ripens all
beings, completely absorbs and upholds all dharmas of the Buddha,
serves as the most superior of merit fields for all beings, acts as the
wise guide for all the [caravans of] traders, and becomes the sun
of purity for the entire world. Every one of his roots of goodness

620

The Flower Adornment Sutra
completely pervades the Dharma realm and is able to rescue and
protect all beings and enable them all to purify and become com­
pletely replete in the meritorious qualities.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
dedications in these ways:
He is able to protect and preserve the lineage of all buddhas;
He is able to ripen all beings to maturity;
He is able to purify all lands;
He is able to refrain from damaging anyone’s karma;
He is able to completely know all dharmas;
He is able to equally contemplate all dharmas as non-dual;
He is able to go everywhere throughout the worlds of the ten
directions;
He is able to completely penetrate the apex of reality apart from
desire;
He is able to completely develop pure resolute faith; and
He is able to become fully possessed of clear and sharp faculties.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the fourth of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications, the dedication that reaches
everywhere. When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides in this dedi­
cation:
He acquires physical actions that reach everywhere by which he is
everywhere able to respond by appearing in all worlds;
He acquires verbal actions that reach everywhere by which he
expounds the Dharma in all worlds;
He acquires mental actions that reach everywhere by which he
absorbs and upholds the Dharma proclaimed by all buddhas;
He acquires the spiritual superknowledge of psycho-physical
travel that reaches everywhere by which he adapts to beings’
minds and goes forth in response to them all;
He acquires wisdom concordant with realizations that reaches
everywhere by which he is everywhere able to fully compre­
hend all dharmas;
He acquires complete-retention [dhāraṇī formulae] and eloquence
that reaches everywhere by which he adapts to beings’ minds
and causes them to feel happy;
He acquires entry into the Dharma realm that reaches everywhere
by which he everywhere enters all worlds even within a single
pore;
He acquires a pervasively penetrating body that reaches every­
where by which he everywhere enters the bodies of all beings
through entering the body of but a single being;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
621
He acquires universal vision of kalpas that reaches everywhere by
which he always sees all tathāgatas in every kalpa; and
He acquires all-seeing mindfulness that reaches everywhere by
which, even in each successive mind-moment, all buddhas
appear directly before him.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva who acquires the
dedication that reaches everywhere is able to dedicate his roots of
goodness in ways such as these.
Then, assisted by the Buddha’s awesome spiritual powers, Vajra
Banner Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and spoke these
verses:
In all inward and outward worlds,
the bodhisattva remains free of all attachments,
yet does not abandon actions beneficial to beings.
The great eminence cultivates wisdom such as this.
In all lands throughout the ten directions,
he has nothing on which he depends and nothing in which he abides.
He does not seize on livelihoods or the many other such dharmas
and also does not wrongly give rise to any discriminations.
He everywhere attracts all beings without exception
throughout the worlds of the ten directions
even as he contemplates their essential nature as entirely nonexistent
and practices dedications which reach everywhere.
He everywhere gathers conditioned and unconditioned dharmas,
but does not form erroneous conceptions about them
just as [he also does not do so] with regard to worldly dharmas.
Just so did the Lamp that Illuminates the World become awakened.
All actions and practices cultivated by the bodhisattva
are each different in their superior, middling, and lesser types.
He dedicates all such roots of goodness
to all those tathāgatas throughout the ten directions.
The bodhisattva’s dedications reach the far shore of perfection.
Following the Tathāgata in his training, he perfects all [practices].
Constantly using sublime wisdom, he skillfully deliberates
and thus fully embodies the human realm’s most supreme Dharma.
He everywhere dedicates his pure roots of goodness
to benefiting the many confused beings, never abandoning them.
Thus he enables all beings to succeed
in becoming unexcelled lamps illuminating the world.
He never discriminates among or seizes on the existence of beings,
nor does he indulge false conceptions in his mindfulness of dharmas.

622

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Although he is free of defiling attachments to the world,
he still never abandons any sentient beings.
The bodhisattva always delights in the dharma of quiescence
and, by according with that, succeeds in reaching the realm of nirvāṇa.
He still never abandons the paths of beings
and thus acquires sublime wisdom such as this.
The bodhisattva never makes discriminations regarding karma,
nor does he seize on or attach to any karmic rewards or retributions.
Given that all worlds are produced through conditioned arising,
it is not apart from causes and conditions that he sees all dharmas.
He deeply enters spheres of experience such as these,
and yet he does not form discriminations regarding them.
The master tamer of all beings,
fully understanding this, skillfully practices dedications.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication of an inexhaustible treasury of meritorious
qualities? Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedi­
cates:
The roots of goodness arising from repentance and riddance of all
heavy karmic obstacles;
The roots of goodness arising from revering all buddhas of the
three periods of time;
The roots of goodness arising from entreating and requesting all
buddhas to teach the Dharma;
The roots of goodness arising from hearing the buddhas teach the
Dharma, cultivating it with intense diligence, and awakening
to its inconceivably vast realms;
The roots of goodness arising from rejoicing in all roots of good­
ness of all buddhas and all beings of the past, future, and pres­
ent;
The roots of goodness arising from this bodhisattva’s knowing
and generating thoughts of rejoicing in the inexhaustible roots
of goodness of all buddhas of the past, future, and present, the
roots of goodness of the community of all bodhisattvas created
by their intensely diligent cultivation, and the roots of good­
ness of all buddhas of the three periods of time by their realiza­
tion of the right and perfect enlightenment, their turning of the
wheel of right Dharma, and their training of beings; and
The roots of goodness arising from rejoicing in [the merit of] all
buddhas of the three periods of time from the time they first
resolve to attain bodhi, cultivate the bodhisattva practices, and

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
623
attain the utmost right enlightenment, including their mani­
festing the appearance of entering parinirvāṇa, and, after their
parinirvāṇa, their right Dharma’s remaining in the world until it
finally becomes completely extinguished.
[Rejoicing] in this way, the bodhisattva brings to mind all the vast
roots of goodness of countless different kinds such as these related
to the ineffable number of spheres of action of all buddhas, his own
spheres of action, and the unimpeded spheres of action related to
bodhi, including all those he has accumulated, all those related to
his resolute faith, all those related to his rejoicing [in the merit of
others], all those he has brought to perfect fulfillment, all those he
has completely developed, all those he has cultivated, all those he
has acquired, all those of which he is aware, all those he has accu­
mulated, and all those he has increased. He then dedicates all [these
roots of goodness] to the adornment of the lands of all buddhas,
including such places as all those in all worlds in which, throughout
the boundlessly many kalpas of the past, all tathāgatas have previ­
ously traveled, that is to say all the measurelessly and innumerably
many world systems of the buddhas, all those places known by the
buddhas’ knowledge, and all those places of which the bodhisat­
tvas have been aware and which their great resolve has embraced,
thus adorning those buddha kṣetras.
[These include] those places that have flowed forth from and
been guided along by pure deeds, those that have been created in
responding to beings, those that have been manifested by the spiri­
tual powers of the Tathāgata, those that have been established by
the pure actions arising from the appearance of the buddhas in the
world, those that have appeared due to the marvelous practices of
Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, and those in which all buddhas have
attained enlightenment and have manifested all different kinds of
masterful spiritual powers.
These include those buddha lands that will acquire pure adorn­
ments and meritorious qualities which will be acquired until the
very bounds of the future by all the tathāgatas, those worthy of
offerings, those of right and universal knowledge who will come to
dwell everywhere throughout the Dharma realm when they attain
enlightenment. Throughout the Dharma realm and the realms of
empty space, they will be boundless, borderless, infinite, and end­
less. They will all be produced by the wisdom of the tathāgatas and
adorned with countless marvelous precious things, namely all kinds
of incense adornments, all kinds of flower adornments, all kinds of
robe adornments, all kinds of adornments consisting of treasuries

624

The Flower Adornment Sutra
of meritorious qualities, all kinds of buddha power adornments,
and all kinds of buddha land adornments in which the tathāgatas
will dwell and in which there will dwell inconceivable pure con­
gregations of those with the previous-life causal affinities of joint
practice who, in the future, will attain right enlightenment after
having been brought to complete development by all buddhas.
These things are not visible by those abiding in the world,
for only one with the bodhisattva’s purified eyes would be able
to illuminate and see them. Bodhisattvas of this sort possess
great awesome virtue. They have planted roots of goodness in
past lives and know all dharmas as like mere conjurations or like
magical transformations. They everywhere practice bodhisattva’s
pure karmic deeds and enter inconceivable masterful samādhis
and skillful expedient means. They are able to accomplish the
works of the Buddha and emanate the light of the Buddha which
is unlimited in its ability to everywhere illuminate the world.
So too do all buddhas, the bhagavats, of the present all also
adorn worlds in this way, worlds possessed of measureless forms
and characteristics and measureless light and colors, all of which
reach their complete development because of their meritorious
qualities. They are adorned with countless kinds of incense,
countless jewels, countless trees, numberless kinds of adorn­
ments, numberless palaces, and numberless sounds.
In accordance with good spiritual guides with whom they
have causal affinities from previous lives, they manifest all kinds
of endless and inexhaustible adornments of meritorious qualities,
in particular all kinds of incense adornments, all kinds of garland
adornments, all kinds of powdered incense adornments, all kinds
of jewel adornments, all kinds of pennant adornments, all kinds
of jeweled silk embroidery adornments, all kinds of jeweled rail­
ing adornments, asaṃkhyeyas of gold net adornments, asaṃkhyeyas
of river adornments, asaṃkhyeyas of cloud and rain adornments,
and asaṃkhyeyas of musical performances with the playing of
marvelous sounds.
Measurelessly and innumerably many other adornments such
as these adorn all the buddha lands within the worlds throughout
the ten directions of the Dharma realm and the realm of empty
space, all of which adornments are produced through all kinds
of different karmic deeds, all of which are completely known to
the buddhas and all of which are broadly proclaimed by the bud­
dhas, that is: adorned buddha lands, pure buddha lands, equa­
nimous buddha lands, marvelously fine buddha lands, buddha

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
625
lands of awesome virtue, vast buddha lands, happy buddha lands,
indestructible buddha lands, endless buddha lands, measureless
buddha lands, unmoving buddha lands, buddha lands free of fear,
radiant buddha lands, buddha lands free of opposition, delightful
buddha lands, pervasively radiant buddha lands, buddha lands
with excellent adornments, buddha lands of refined beauty, mar­
velously exquisite buddha lands, foremost buddha lands, supreme
buddha lands, extraordinarily supreme buddha lands, most
supreme buddha lands, ultimately supreme buddha lands, excel­
lent buddha lands, unexcelled buddha lands, incomparable buddha
lands, peerless buddha lands, and buddha lands indescribable even
by analogy.
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva resolves to dedicate his roots of
goodness to using all the adornments of all buddha lands such as
these of the past, the future, and the present, wishing to use all
the pure adornments such as these of all the lands of all the bud­
dhas of the past, future, and present to adorn a single world so that
it will be adorned in just the same way that all those adornments
are perfected, purified, collected, manifested, marvelously arrayed,
and sustained in all those other buddha lands. And just as he vows
to do this in a single world, so too does he vow to also fully adorn
all worlds with all the different kinds of adornments present in the
buddha lands of all buddhas of the three periods of time.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also uses his
roots of goodness to make dedications such as these:
May it be that all those buddha lands to which I devote such cul­
tivation will be filled with great bodhisattvas, that all those bod­
hisattvas will have an essential nature that is genuine, that they
will be possessed of penetrating wisdom with which they will be
well able to make distinctions regarding all worlds and realms
of beings, that they will deeply enter the Dharma realm and the
realm of empty space, that they will have abandoned all delusion,
that they will perfect mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness
of the genuine and inconceivable Dharma, and mindfulness of
the Sangha as measureless and pervasively present everywhere
while also remaining mindful of relinquishing, that they will be
round and full suns of the Dharma whose wisdom light every­
where illuminates so that their vision is unimpeded, that they
will be born from non-attainment and will bring forth all dhar­
mas of the Buddha, that they will be lords of the many supremely
excellent roots of goodness, that they will have produced the
resolve to attain unexcelled bodhi, that they will dwell in the
Tathāgata’s powers and progress toward all-knowledge, that they

626

The Flower Adornment Sutra
will demolish all the works of the māras, that they will purify
the realms of beings, that they will deeply penetrate the nature
of dharmas, that they will forever abandon inverted views, and
that their roots of goodness and great vows will not have been
made in vain.
May bodhisattvas such as these fill up those lands, being
born in such places, possessed of virtues such as these, always
accomplishing the Buddha’s works, acquiring the pure light of
the Buddha’s bodhi, possessing the knowledge of the Dharma
realm, manifesting the powers of the spiritual superknowl­
edges, filling up the entire Dharma realm with a single body,
acquiring great wisdom, entering the sphere of practice of those
possessed of all-knowledge, being well able to distinguish the
countless and boundless meanings of all statements throughout
the Dharma realm, being free of any attachments in any kṣetras
and thus being able to appear everywhere in all buddha lands,
having minds like space that have nothing they depend on and
thus being able to distinguish everything in the entire Dharma
realm, being well able to enter and emerge from inconceiv­
ably many extremely deep samādhis, progressing toward all-
knowledge, dwelling in all buddha kṣetras, acquiring the pow­
ers of all buddhas, explaining and expounding on asaṃkhyeyas
of dharmas and thus remaining fearless in doing so, according
with the roots of goodness of all buddhas of the three peri­
ods of time, everywhere illuminating the Dharma realm of all
tathāgatas, being able to absorb and uphold all the dharmas of
all buddhas, knowing asaṃkhyeyas of language dharmas, being
well able to expound with inconceivably many different spoken
languages, entering into the unexcelled ground of the Buddha’s
sovereign masteries, being unimpeded in traveling to all worlds
everywhere throughout the ten directions, practicing the dhar­
mas of noncontentiousness and having nothing on which they
depend while remaining free of discriminations, cultivating an
increasingly vast bodhi resolve, acquiring knowledge of skillful
means, thoroughly knowing the meanings of statements, and
being able to accord with correct sequence in explaining and
expounding on those meanings.
May it be that great bodhisattvas such as these will be
enabled to adorn those lands, will fill them, will be distributed
throughout them, will harmoniously abide there as they are
established in them, will practice permeating cultivation that
is the most ultimate form of permeating cultivation, will attain
unalloyed purity that is the most ultimate kind of unalloyed

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
627
purity, and will harmoniously and peacefully abide in quiescence
within them.
May it be that in every single place even in a single buddha
kṣetra, there will be numberlessly many, measurelessly many,
boundlessly many, incomparably many, innumerably many, inde­
scribably many, inconceivably many, immeasurably many, ineffa­
bly many, ineffably-ineffably many such great bodhisattvas who
fill up all places everywhere, and may it be that just as this is so in
one region, so too will it also be so in all other regions. And may it
be that, just as this is the case in a single buddha kṣetra, it will also
be the case in just the same way in all buddha kṣetras throughout
all of empty space everywhere in the Dharma realm.
Sons of the Buddha, [in the furtherance of skillful means], the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all his roots of goodness [in
these ways]:
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to all buddha kṣetras;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to all bodhisattvas;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to all tathāgatas;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to the bodhi of all buddhas;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to all vast vows;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to all essential paths of
emancipation;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to the purification of all
realms of beings;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to always seeing all bud­
dhas appear in the world in all worlds;
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to always seeing the life
span of the Tathāgata as measureless; and
As a skillful means, he dedicates them to always seeing all bud­
dhas everywhere throughout the Dharma realm turning the
unimpeded and irreversible wheel of the Dharma.
Sons of the Buddha, when this bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates
all his roots of goodness in these ways, because he enters all buddha
lands, all buddha kṣetras are purified, because he goes to all realms
of beings, all bodhisattvas are purified, and because he wishes
for the buddhas to appear in all buddha lands, the bodies of all
tathāgatas then majestically appear in all buddha lands throughout
the Dharma realm.
Sons of the Buddha, by means of peerless dedications such as
these, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva progresses toward all-knowl­
edge. His mind is vast, like empty space, and unlimited. He enters
the inconceivable and realizes that all karmic actions as well as

628

The Flower Adornment Sutra
their corresponding rewards and retributions are all quiescent.
His mind is always equanimous, boundless, and everywhere able
to enter the entire Dharma realm.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva prac­
tices dedications in this way:
He does not discriminate the existence of a self or belongings
of a self;
He does not discriminate the existence of the Buddha or the
Dharma of the Buddha;
He does not discriminate the existence of kṣetras or their puri­
fication;
He does not discriminate the existence of beings or their train­
ing;
He does not discriminate the existence of actions or their kar­
mic rewards and retributions;
He does not become attached to thought or whatever arises
from thought;
He does not deny the existence of causes and does not deny the
existence of their effects;
He does not seize on phenomena and does not seize on dhar­
mas;
He does not claim that saṃsāra [necessarily] involves the exis­
tence of discriminations and he does not claim that nirvāṇa is
constantly quiescent; and
He does not claim that the Tathāgata realizes the realm of the
buddha, for not even the slightest dharma can coexist with
the Dharma.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva practices
dedications in these ways, he gives all his roots of goodness to all
beings to bring about their definite ripening and to teach them
equally, doing so in a manner that is signless, free of conditions,
free of any judgment, and free of any falseness while also aban­
doning all discriminations, grasping, and attachments.
After the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes dedications in this
way, he then acquires endless roots of goodness, which is to say:
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he is mindful of
all buddhas of the three periods of time;
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he is mindful of
all bodhisattvas;
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he purifies all
buddha kṣetras;
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he purifies all
realms of beings;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
629
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he deeply enters
the Dharma realm;
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he cultivates the
immeasurable minds to the point that they are commensurate
with the realm of empty space;
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he deeply under­
stands the sphere of action of all buddhas;
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he diligently culti­
vates the works of the bodhisattva; and
He acquires endless roots of goodness because he completely
comprehends the three periods of time.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all
his roots of goodness in these ways:
He comprehends that all realms of beings have no beings in them;
He understands that all dharmas are free of any life span;
He knows all dharmas have no creator;
He has awakened to all dharmas as having no pudgala;
He comprehends all dharmas as free of any anger or contentious­
ness;
He contemplates all dharmas as arising from conditions and as
having no place where they dwell;
He knows all things have nothing on which they depend;
He comprehends that all kṣetras have no place in which they abide;
He contemplates all bodhisattva practices as also having no loca­
tion; and
He perceives that all objective spheres of experience are all non­
existent.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva practices
dedications in these ways, his eyes never see any impure buddha
kṣetra, nor do they see any being possessed of differentiating signs.
For him, there is not even the slightest dharma that is penetrated
by wisdom, nor is there even the slightest sort of wisdom that then
penetrates any dharma. He understands that it is not the case that
the body of the Tathāgata is like empty space because it is perfectly
complete in all the meritorious qualities and countless sublime
dharmas and because it everywhere enables beings to accumulate
roots of goodness which are all sufficiently abundant.
Sons of the Buddha, in each successive mind-moment, this
bodhisattva-mahāsattva acquires an ineffable-ineffable number of
aspects of the ground of the ten powers, becomes replete in every
kind of merit, perfects pure roots of goodness, and serves all beings
as a field of merit.

630

The Flower Adornment Sutra
This bodhisattva-mahāsattva develops a maṇi jewel wishing-
pearl treasury of meritorious qualities on account of which he
obtains whichever pleasing amenities he needs. Wherever he
travels, he is able to purify all those lands, and wherever he goes,
he enables an ineffable-ineffable number of beings to all become
purified and gather merit by cultivating all the practices.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva prac­
tices dedications in this way, he cultivates all the bodhisattva
practices by which his merit becomes extraordinarily excellent,
his physical signs become peerless, his awesome powers and radi­
ance surpass those of everyone in the world, and neither Māra
nor the followers of Māra are even able to stand before him and
gaze upon him. His roots of goodness become completely devel­
oped, his great vows become completely realized, and his mind
becomes ever more vast to the point that it is equal to the realm
of all-knowledge. In but a single mind-moment, he is able to per­
vade countless buddha kṣetras. His measureless wisdom power is
able to completely penetrate the realm of all buddhas. He acquires
deep resolute faith in all buddhas and dwells in boundless wis­
dom. The power of his resolve to attain bodhi is as vast as the
Dharma realm and as ultimately expansive as empty space.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the fifth of the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications, the dedication of an inex­
haustible treasury of meritorious qualities. The bodhisattva-
mahāsattva who abides in this dedication acquires ten inexhaust­
ible treasuries. What then are those ten? They are:
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of seeing the buddhas
by which, in but a single pore, he sees asaṃkhyeyas of buddhas
appearing in the world;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of penetrating dharmas
by which, using the Buddha’s power of cognition, he contem­
plates all dharmas as entering a single dharma;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of remembrance by
which he absorbs and retains all the Dharma taught by all
buddhas and never forgets it;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of definite wisdom by
which he well knows the esoteric skillful means within the
Dharma taught by all buddhas;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of understanding mean­
ings and their import by which he well knows all dharmas’
principles, aims, and distinguishing aspects;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of boundless awakened
understanding by which, with wisdom like empty space, he

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
631
gains a penetrating comprehension of all dharmas of the three
periods of time;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of merit by which he ful­
fills the inexhaustible wishes of all beings;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of courageous wisdom
and awakening by which he is able to rid all beings of their
cataracts of delusion;
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of definite eloquence by
which he expounds on the impartial Dharma of all buddhas
and enables all beings to completely understand it; and
He acquires the inexhaustible treasury of the ten powers and the
fearlessnesses by which he completely fulfills all the bodhisat­
tva practices and, having tied his topknot with the silken head­
band of stainless purity, he reaches unimpeded all-knowledge.
These are the ten. Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva dedicates all his roots of goodness, he acquires these
ten inexhaustible treasuries.
At that time, Vajra Banner Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions
and then spoke these verses:
The bodhisattva perfects the power of the deep mind,
attains sovereign mastery in all dharmas,
and uses the merit of his entreaties and rejoicing [in others’ goodness]
to practice unimpeded skillful means and dedications.
The purified buddha kṣetras of all tathāgatas
of the three periods of time pervade all worlds.
[The bodhisattva] has no meritorious quality he does not possess
and dedicates them to purifying kṣetras just as pervasively.
The bodhisattva carefully reflects
on all dharmas of all buddhas of the three periods of time
and gathers them all without exception into his own mind.
It is in this way that he adorns all buddha kṣetras.
Even if one tried throughout all kalpas of the three periods of time
to praise all the meritorious qualities of but a single buddha kṣetra,
even though one might exhaust all kalpas of the three periods of time,
that buddha kṣetra’s meritorious qualities would still be endless.
Without exception, the bodhisattva sees
all buddha kṣetras such as these,
uses all their adornments to adorn but a single buddha land
and also proceeds in this same way to adorn all buddha lands.
There are sons of the Buddha whose minds are pure
who are all as if transformationally born of the Tathāgata’s Dharma,

632

The Flower Adornment Sutra
who have all the meritorious qualities adorning their minds,
and who fill up all the buddha kṣetras.
All those bodhisattvas completely possess
all the measureless marks and signs adorning their bodies
and their eloquent expounding of Dharma pervades the worlds.
They are as endless as a vast ocean.
The bodhisattvas peacefully abide in all the samādhis
and have completely perfected all of the practices.
The purity of their minds is incomparable and
their light everywhere illuminates the realms of the ten directions.
All of these bodhisattvas completely fill up
all such buddha kṣetras without exception.
They never so much as bring to mind the vehicle of śrāvaka disciples
and do not seek out the path of the pratyekabuddhas, either.
This bodhisattva, in this way, with a mind that is pure,
dedicates his roots of goodness to the many kinds of beings,
wishing to enable them all to attain right enlightenment,
completely fulfilling and fully knowing the Dharma of all buddhas.
The bodhisattva’s awesome power completely vanquishes
all the many māra adversaries throughout the ten directions.
His valor and wisdom are invincible
as he decisively cultivates the ultimate Dharma.
With the power of these great vows, the bodhisattva
practices all his dedications unhindered by anything.
He enters the inexhaustible treasury of meritorious qualities
which is forever endless throughout the past, future, and present.
The bodhisattva thoroughly contemplates all the practice dharmas
and fully comprehends that their nature is not inherently existent.
Having realized that the nature of all dharmas is of this sort,
he doesn’t mistakenly seize on karma or its rewards and retributions.
There are no form dharmas or formless dharmas.
So too, there is neither perception nor non-perception.
Existent dharmas and nonexistent dharmas are all nonexistent.
He completely realizes that they all are inapprehensible,
that all dharmas arise from causes and conditions,
and that their essential nature is neither existent nor nonexistent,
even as he finally remains entirely free of grasping or attachment
to any causes or conditions or anything they produce.
There is finally nothing apprehensible
in the bases of all beings’ words and speech.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
633
He fully realizes that all names and signs are just discriminations
and clearly understands that all dharmas are devoid of any self.
Just as with beings’ nature that is originally quiescent,
so too does he completely know all other dharmas.
Everything without exception included in the three periods of time,
the kṣetras and all karma—they are all the same in this.
It is with wisdom such as this that he practices dedications.
As befits his awakened understanding, his meritorious actions arise.
The signs of all this merit are also understood in the same way.
How then could there be anything more in it that is apprehensible?
By practicing dedications this way, his mind stays free of defilements
and never engages in assessments of any dharmas as having a nature.
He fully comprehends their nature as in every case not a nature.
Thus he does not abide in the world, nor then does he leave it.
He dedicates to all the many types of beings
all the many kinds of good karmic works that he does.
There are none of them whose nature he does not fully comprehend,
thus he completely does away with all discriminations about them.
Without exception, he entirely abandons
all unreal and false views.
Having abandoned all hot afflictions, he is constantly clear and cool
and abides then on the ground of unimpeded liberation.
The bodhisattva does not damage any dharma
nor does he extinguish any dharma’s nature.
He understands completely all dharmas are like mere echoes
and thus remains free of attachment to anything at all.
He fully knows that all beings of the three periods of time
all arise from the conjunction of causes and conditions,
and also knows mental dispositions and habitual karmic propensities
have never destroyed any dharma.
He fully comprehends that an action’s nature is not the action itself
and does not contradict the marks of any dharma.
He also does not contradict the idea that retributions arise from actions
and explains it is the nature of all dharmas to arise from conditions.
He fully realizes that beings do not have any arising,
that there are no beings who can flow along in cyclic existence,
that there are no real beings at all of which one can speak, and that
it is only due to worldly custom that he teaches conventionally.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication to strengthening everyone’s roots of

634

The Flower Adornment Sutra
goodness?359 Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva
sometimes serves as an emperor or king who governs a great
nation, one whose awesome virtue is far-reaching, one whose
fame so shakes the entire world that none of his usual adversaries
and enemies fail to take refuge in him and submit to his rule, one
who, in issuing edicts and orders, always relies on right Dharma
and holds up a single canopy whose vast shade covers the myriad
regions in which he travels all about as the leader of the land,
unopposed wherever he goes, one who ties up his topknot with
the silken headband of stainless purity, one who possesses sov­
ereign mastery in the Dharma, one to whom everyone who sees
him submits, one who does not inflict punishments or exact fines,
but rather relies on the influence of his virtue to induce compli­
ance with teaching, one who relies on the four means of attraction
to gather in all beings, one who serves as a wheel-turning king
devoted to universal generosity.
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva abiding in sovereign mastery
and meritorious qualities such as these is one who has a large
retinue, who cannot be impeded, who has abandoned the many
kinds of faults, who no one ever tires of seeing, whose merit-
based adornment with the marks and signs is perfectly complete,
whose physical form and limbs are all symmetrically formed and
fully developed, who has acquired the solid body of a nārāyaṇa,
whose great strength is completely developed, who no one can
force to submit, who has developed purified karma, and who has
left behind all karmic obstacles. He completely fulfills the culti­
vation of all forms of giving, sometimes giving drink and food
including those of superior flavor, sometimes giving vehicles,
sometimes giving robes, and sometimes giving flower garlands,
various kinds of incense and perfume, beds and seats, living quar­
ters, or dwelling places, including even the place where he lives,
supremely fine lamps and candles, herbal decoctions for treating
the sick, jeweled vessels, jeweled carriages, or well-trained and
good-natured elephants and horses, all of which are beautifully
adorned.
He delights in giving. Even if someone comes and begs the
throne on which the king resides, his canopies or parasols, his
banners, pennants, jeweled possessions, adornments, the jeweled
crown atop his head, the bright jewel set in his topknot, or even
his position as a king, he is free of any miserliness in giving away
all of these.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
635
If he encounters beings in prison, then he will relinquish his
wealth, jewels, wives, sons, retinue, and so forth, including even his
own body, all for the sake of rescuing that person and allowing him
to go free. If he encounters a person who is imprisoned and about to
be executed, he will immediately sacrifice his own body, presenting
it as substitute for someone else’s life. Were he to encounter some­
one coming and begging even his scalp and hair on the crown of his
head, he would happily give it to them, also without any reserva­
tion. He would even give his eyes, ears, nose, tongue, teeth, the top
of his head, his hands or feet, his blood, flesh, bones, marrow, heart,
kidneys, liver, lungs, large intestine, small intestine, thick skin, thin
skin, the digits of his hands or feet, or his nails with their underly­
ing flesh, giving all of these things with a delighted mind.
Or else, for the purpose of seeking Dharma that he has never
possessed, he might even cast his own body into a deep and huge
fire pit. Or else, in order to protect and preserve the Tathāgata’s
right Dharma, he would allow his body to endure the infliction of
all kinds of excruciating pain. Or else, for the purpose of seeking
even a single word of Dharma, he would be able to everywhere
relinquish all of his possessions contained within the area bordered
by the four great oceans.
He constantly uses right Dharma to teach and guide the many
kinds of beings, thereby enabling them to cultivate the practice
of goodness and abandon every form of evil. If he observes some
being injuring the body of another, he arouses the mind of kindness
and rescues him, causing the perpetrator to abandon his criminal
actions.
If he encounters a tathāgata who has attained the utmost right
enlightenment, he spreads about his praises, thereby enabling
everyone to hear and know of this. He might then make a gift of
land and found a Sangha establishment with buildings and halls as
dwelling places while also providing servants to serve and work for
them. He might even contribute his own body to those who come
begging or might give it in service to the Buddha, feeling exultantly
happy because it is for the sake of seeking the Dharma. Or, for the
sake of other beings, he might serve them or make offerings to them.
Or else, he might relinquish his position as the king, his city,
its outlying areas, villages, palaces, parks, and forests, wives, chil­
dren, or retinues, all according to what a supplicant is seeking, all
in order to completely fulfill their wishes. He might establish every­
where great assemblies for unrestricted giving of all the necessi­
ties of life in which the beings attending them include the many

636

The Flower Adornment Sutra
different kinds of fields of merit who might come from far or near,
might be either worthies or the foolish, might be either beautiful
or homely, might be men or women, or might be humans or non-
humans, each of whom differs in their mentality and in what they
seek. In those circumstances, he gives equally to them all, thereby
enabling them all to feel satisfied.
Sons of the Buddha, when this bodhisattva-mahāsattva practices
giving in these ways, he develops a well-focused mind with which
he dedicates it all, devoting his physical form to strengthening all
roots of goodness, devoting his feelings, perceptions, karmic forma­
tive factors, and consciousness to strengthening roots of goodness,
devoting his position as king to strengthening roots of goodness,
devoting [the efforts of] his retinue to strengthening roots of good­
ness, devoting his resources to strengthening roots of goodness,
and devoting his kindly giving to strengthening roots of goodness.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates his
roots of goodness in ways which correspond to the countless and
boundless kinds of gifts that he gives, for example, [doing so as
follows].360
When he gives supremely fine foods to beings, his mind is pure
and free of any covetousness, attachment, or regretful miserliness
for the food he gives as he completely fulfills the practice of giving,
wishing that all beings will acquire the food of wisdom with unim­
peded minds, fully knowing the nature of food, without any covet­
ous attachment to it, only delighting with Dharma joy in the food of
emancipation, filled with wisdom, using the Dharma to steadfastly
abide in the gathering of roots of goodness. With the Dharma body
and the wisdom body, he roams in purity, feeling deep and kindly
sympathy for beings, serving them as a field of merit by appear­
ing before them to accept [their giving of] morsels of food. This is
the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedication of roots of goodness when
giving food.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
things to drink, he dedicates these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings drink water with the flavor of the Dharma;
May they cultivate and fulfill the bodhisattva path with energetic
diligence;
May they cut off worldly thirst;
May they always seek the Buddha’s wisdom;
May they separate from the objects of desire;
May they acquire the joy and bliss of the Dharma;
May their bodies be born from the pure Dharma;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
637
May they always train and focus their minds with samādhi;
May they enter the ocean of wisdom; and
May they spread forth clouds of great Dharma and rain down the
rains of great Dharma.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving things to drink.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives all differ­
ent kinds of pure and supremely fine flavors, in particular giving
[food and drink] that are pungent, sour, salty, and plain, also includ­
ing sweet and bitter, thus giving all kinds of different flavors which,
glistening with moisture, are well able to stabilize and regulate the
four essential elements and enable the muscles to be full, the energy
and strength to be robust, and the mind to be clear and always able
to be happy. When these are chewed and swallowed, they do not
induce gagging or regurgitation. Rather, they induce shining clar­
ity in all the faculties and fullness in the internal organs while also
ensuring that toxins are unable to invade, illness is unable to cause
harm, disorders will never arise, and one will forever experience
happiness. He dedicates these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the most supreme flavors and be filled
with the elixir of immortality;
May all beings acquire the flavor of Dharma wisdom and fully
understand the karmic uses of all flavors;
May all beings acquire the flavor of countless dharmas, fully
comprehend the Dharma realm, and securely dwell in the great
Dharma city of the apex of reality;
May all beings create great Dharma clouds that spread through­
out the Dharma realm, everywhere rain down the Dharma
rain, and thus teach and train all beings;
May all beings acquire the flavor of supreme wisdom and may
unexcelled Dharma joy fill their bodies and minds;
May all beings acquire all the supreme flavors of freedom from
covetousness and attachment, remain undefiled by any of the
flavors of worldliness, and always diligently cultivate all dhar­
mas of the Buddha;
May all beings acquire the flavor of the one Dharma and com­
pletely understand the dharmas of all buddhas as free of any
differences;
May all beings acquire the most supreme flavors, board [the vehi­
cle of] all-knowledge, and never turn back;
May all beings acquire entry into the Buddha’s unvarying Dharma
flavor and become able to distinguish all faculties; and

638

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings acquire increased flavor of Dharma and always be
able to fulfill the unimpeded Dharma of the Buddha.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving flavors. He makes these dedications to enable
all beings to diligently cultivate merit and completely develop the
unimpeded wisdom body.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
vehicles, he dedicates his roots of goodness in these ways: “May
all beings succeed in acquiring the vehicle of all-knowledge and
in boarding the Great Vehicle, the indestructible vehicle, the most
supreme vehicle, the most superior vehicle, the swift vehicle, the
vehicle of great power, the vehicle complete in merit, the world-
transcending vehicle, and the vehicle that gives birth to countless
other bodhisattvas.” This is the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedica­
tion of roots of goodness when giving vehicles.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
gifts of clothing, he dedicates his roots of goodness in these ways:
“May all beings acquire the robes of a sense of shame and dread
of blame with which to cover themselves and abandon the wrong
dharma of the deviant traditions’ naked asceticism. May they
acquire a countenance that is moist and lustrous and skin that is
fine and soft. May they perfect the foremost happiness of the bud­
dhas. And may they acquire the utmost purity of the knowledge of
all modes. These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of
roots of goodness when giving clothing.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva always makes
gifts of many different kinds of fine flowers such as sublimely fra­
grant flowers, flowers of various colors, countless exotic and mar­
velous flowers, beautiful flowers, delightful flowers, flowers of
every season, heavenly flowers, flowers of the human realm, the
world’s most cherished flowers, and extremely fragrant and delight­
ful flowers.
He makes offerings of countless marvelous flowers such as these
to all buddhas of the present as well as to the stupas and shrines of
buddhas after they enter nirvāṇa. He may present them as offer­
ings to those who teach the Dharma, may present them as offerings
to bhikshus, to the Sangha Jewel, to all the bodhisattvas, to good
spiritual guides, to śrāvaka disciples or pratyekabuddhas, to parents
or relatives, or even to himself, or to anyone else, including all who
are poor or solitary. When he engages in such giving, he dedicates
his roots of goodness in these ways:

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
639
May all beings acquire the flowers of all buddha’s samādhis and
become able to bring about the blooming of all dharmas;
May all beings become like the Buddha in that whoever encoun­
ters them is endlessly delighted to see them;
May all beings feel agreeably satisfied with whatever they see,
having minds that remain undisturbed;
May all beings fully practice vast and pure karmic works;
May all beings always bear in mind their good spiritual friends
with minds that never change;
May all beings become like the agada medicine361 in their ability to
do away with all the many poisons of the afflictions;
May all beings fulfill great vows and become kings of unexcelled
wisdom;
May all beings’ sun of wisdom dispel the darkness of delusion;
May all beings’ pure moon of bodhi grow and become completely
full; and
May all beings enter the great land of jewels, encounter the good
spiritual guide, and completely develop all roots of goodness.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving flowers. He makes these dedications to
enable all beings to acquire pure and unimpeded wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
garlands, he dedicates roots of goodness in this way: “May all
beings become such that others delight in seeing them, those who
see them revere and praise them, those who see them feel close and
friendly, those who see them feel fondness for them, those who see
them admire and look up to them, those who seem them become
free of worries, those who see them feel joyful, those who see them
abandon evil, those who see them are then always able to draw near
to the Buddha, and those who see them become pure and attain
all-knowledge.” This is the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedication of
roots of goodness when giving garlands.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
incense, he dedicates roots of goodness in this way: “May all beings
possess the incense of the moral precepts and acquire moral pre­
cepts free of deficiencies, moral precepts that are not impure, moral
precepts that are undefiled, moral precepts free of regretfulness,
moral precepts free of entanglements, moral precepts free of heat,
moral precepts free of infractions, moral precepts that are bound­
less, moral precepts that are world-transcending, and the moral pre­
cepts of the bodhisattva’s pāramitās. May all beings be able to perfect

640

The Flower Adornment Sutra
the moral precept body of all buddhas.” These are the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of goodness when giving incense.
He makes these dedications to enable all beings to achieve perfect
fulfillment of the aggregate of moral precepts.362
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
gifts of perfumes, he dedicates roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of giv­
ing so that they will be able to act with kindness in relinquish­
ing everything they possess;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of moral
virtue so that they acquire the ultimately pure moral precepts
of the Tathāgata;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of
patience so that they will abandon all thoughts of harming oth­
ers;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of vigor
so that they will always don the Great Vehicle’s armor of vigor;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of med­
itative concentration so that they will become securely estab­
lished in the samādhi of the direct presence of all buddhas;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of wis­
dom so that, in but a single mind-moment, they will be able to
become kings of unexcelled wisdom;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of
Dharma so that they will gain fearlessness in the unexcelled
Dharma;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of vir­
tue so that they will develop wisdom possessed of every kind
of great meritorious quality;
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of
bodhi so that they will reach the far shore of perfection in the
ten powers of the Buddha; and
May all beings become fully perfumed with the fragrance of the
dharmas of pristine purity so that they will forever extinguish
all unwholesome dharmas.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving perfumes.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
beds and seats, he dedicates roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of the heavens and real­
ize great wisdom;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
641
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of the worthies and
āryas, abandon the ideation of the common person, and abide
in the bodhi resolve;
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of happiness and for­
ever abandon the suffering and afflictions of saṃsāra;
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of the ultimate and be
able to witness all buddhas’ masterful spiritual superknowl­
edges;
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of equanimity and con­
stantly and habitually cultivate all good dharmas;
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of supremacy and fulfill
pure karma unmatched anywhere in the world;
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of peace and security
and realize the genuine dharma and achieve the complete ful­
fillment of the ultimate;
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of purity and cultivate
the Tathāgata’s sphere of pure knowledge;
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of secure abiding and
acquire the good spiritual guide who always follows and pro­
tects them; and
May all beings acquire the beds and seats of the Lion [among Men]
and always lie down on their right sides like the Tathāgata.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving beds and seats. He makes these dedications
to enable beings to cultivate right mindfulness and skillfully guard
all their sense faculties.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
living quarters, he dedicates roots of goodness in this way: “May
all beings peacefully dwell in pure buddha kṣetras; cultivate with
intense diligence all meritorious qualities; peacefully dwell in
extremely deep spheres of samādhi; abandon all attachments to
dwelling places; fully understand that all dwelling places do not
exist at all; transcend all worlds and dwell in all-knowledge; accu­
mulate the abodes of all buddhas;363 dwell in the ultimate path, the
dwelling place of happiness; constantly dwell in roots of goodness
of foremost purity; and never abandon the unexcelled dwelling
place of the Buddha.364” This is the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedi­
cation of roots of goodness when giving living quarters. It is made
because he wishes to benefit all beings according to what is fitting
for them while contemplating how to rescue and protect them.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
dwelling places, he dedicates roots of goodness in this way: “May

642

The Flower Adornment Sutra
all beings always acquire wholesome benefit and become happy in
mind. May they dwell in reliance on the Tathāgata, dwell in reli­
ance on great wisdom, dwell in reliance on the good spiritual guide,
dwell in reliance on those who are supremely venerable, dwell in
reliance on the practice of goodness, dwell in reliance on great kind­
ness, dwell in reliance on great compassion, dwell in reliance on the
six pāramitās, dwell in reliance on the great bodhi resolve, and dwell
in reliance on the path of all bodhisattvas.” This is the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication of roots of goodness when giving dwelling
places. It is made to enable all to have pure merit, ultimate purity,
pure wisdom, the pure path, pure Dharma, pure moral precepts,
pure aspirations, pure resolute faith, pure vows, and purity of all
the spiritual superknowledges and meritorious qualities.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives all
different kinds of lamplight, namely ghee lamps, oil lamps, jewel
lamps, maṇi jewel lamps, lacquer lamps, fire lamps, agarwood lamps,
sandalwood lamps, all kinds of incense lamps, lamps producing
light of countless colors, and countless other lamps such as these,
wishing to benefit all beings and wishing to attract and include all
beings, he dedicates these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire measureless light with which to every­
where illuminate the right Dharma of all buddhas;
May all beings acquire the light of purity with which to illuminate
and see even the world’s most ultimately subtle forms;
May all beings acquire the light free of visual obscurations and
fully comprehend the realms of beings as devoid of any inher­
ent existence;
May all beings acquire boundless radiance with which their
bodies emanate marvelous light that everywhere illuminates
everything;
May all beings acquire universally illuminating light by which
their minds never retreat from the Dharma of all buddhas;
May all beings acquire the pure light of the Buddha that appears
in all kṣetras;
May all beings acquire the unimpeded radiance in which but a
single ray of light everywhere illuminates the entire Dharma
realm;
May all beings acquire the uninterrupted light that ceaselessly
illuminates all buddha kṣetras;
May all beings acquire the light of the banner of wisdom that
everywhere illuminates the world; and
May all beings acquire the light of countless colors that illumi­
nates all kṣetras and manifests spiritual powers.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
643
When the bodhisattva gives lamplight in these ways, wishing to
serve all beings and wishing to make all beings happy:
He uses these roots of goodness to follow along after beings;
He uses these roots of goodness to attract and include beings;
He uses these roots of goodness to distribute them among beings;
He uses these roots of goodness to act with kindly sympathy
toward beings;
He uses these roots of goodness to shelter and nurture beings;
He uses these roots of goodness to rescue and protect beings;
He uses these roots of goodness to assist beings’ attainment of
complete fulfillment;
He uses these roots of goodness to remain mindful of beings;
He uses these roots of goodness to benefit beings equally; and
He uses these roots of goodness to contemplate beings.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving lamplight. When dedicating them in these
ways, he is unimpeded in enabling all beings to dwell in roots of
goodness.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
herbal decoctions, he dedicates roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings succeed in ultimately escaping from the hindrances
and entanglements;365
May all beings forever leave behind bodies afflicted with sickness
and acquire the body of the Tathāgata;
May all beings become the great and especially good medicine
that extinguishes the diseases of all the unwholesome deeds;
May all beings create the agada medicine by which they become
securely established on the bodhisattva’s ground of irrevers­
ibility;
May all beings create the medicine of the tathāgatas that is able to
remove the poison arrows of all the afflictions;
May all beings draw near to the worthies and āryas, extinguish all
afflictions, and cultivate the pure practices;
May all beings become great physician kings who forever do away
with the many kinds of diseases and prevent them from ever
recurring;
May all beings become indestructible medicine trees able to res­
cue and cure all beings;
May all beings acquire the light of all-knowledge by which they
remove the arrows of the many diseases; and

644

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings come to thoroughly understand the world’s medic­
inal prescription methods in order to save others by curing
them of all diseases.
When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives herbal decoctions, he does
so: to enable all beings to forever leave behind the many diseases;
to attain ultimate peace and security; to attain ultimate purity;
to become, like the Buddha, free of all diseases; to remove all the
arrows of sickness; to acquire the endlessly durable body; to acquire
the body that not even the ring of vajra mountains could destroy;
to acquire enduring and perfectly full strength; to acquire the per­
fectly complete and insuperable bliss of the Buddha; and to acquire
the independent and durable body of all buddhas. He dedicates his
roots of goodness in these ways.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is able to give
with kindness all kinds of vessels, namely vessels of yellow gold
full of various jewels, vessels of silver full of many kinds of mar­
velous jewels, vessels of lapis lazuli full of various kinds of jewels,
crystal vessels full of adornments made of countless jewels, mother-
of-pearl vessels filled with real red pearls, emerald vessels full of
coral and maṇi pearl jewels, vessels of white jade full of the many
kinds of exquisite food, sandalwood vessels full of celestial robes,
vajra vessels full of many kinds of marvelous incense, and measure­
less and numberless vessels made of various jewels that are full of
measureless and numberless jewels of many different kinds. [For
example]:
He may give them to buddhas due to his faith in the inconceiv­
ability of buddhas as fields of merit;
He may give them to bodhisattvas due to knowing that good spir­
itual guides are difficult to encounter;
He may give them to the Ārya Sangha to enable the Buddha’s
Dharma to abide in the world for a long time;
He may give them to śrāvaka disciples or pratyekabuddhas due to
developing pure faith in all those who have become āryas;
He may give them to fathers and mothers to honor them;
He may give them to teachers and elders in appreciation of their
constant guidance and instruction by which they enable one
to rely on the teachings of the āryas in cultivating meritorious
qualities;
He may give them to the lowly, the poor, and the solitary due to
looking equally on all beings with the caring eyes of great kind­
ness and great compassion;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
645
[He may give] due to being single-mindedly devoted to fulfilling
the dāna pāramitā of all bodhisattvas of the past, the future, and
the present; or
He may give everything to everyone everywhere due to never tir­
ing of or abandoning any beings.
When he gives in these ways, he remains free of any attachment
to any of his gifts or to any of those who receive them. When this
bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives all these different kinds of jeweled
vessels full of countless jewels, he dedicates all his roots of good­
ness in these ways:
May all beings become vessels of boundless storage capacity equal
to that of space, having memory power so vast that they are all
able to absorb and retain all worldly and world-transcending
classic scriptures, never forgetting any of them;
May all beings become vessels of purity able to awaken to the
extremely profound right Dharma of all buddhas;
May all beings become vessels of the unsurpassable jewels who
are all able to absorb and retain the Dharma of all buddhas of
the three periods of time;
May all beings become vessels of the Tathāgata’s vast Dharma
who, with indestructible faith, accumulate and absorb the
bodhi dharmas of all buddhas of the three periods of time;
May all beings become the most supreme jewel-adorned vessels
who dwell in the great and awesomely virtuous resolve to
attain bodhi;
May all beings become vessels in which meritorious qualities
reside who develop pure resolute faith in the measureless wis­
dom of all tathāgatas;
May all beings succeed in becoming vessels which progress into
all-knowledge and who achieve the ultimate realization of the
Tathāgata’s unimpeded liberations;
May all beings acquire the vessel of the bodhisattva practices
which endure to the very end of all future kalpas and thus
become able to cause all beings to become securely established
in the power of all-knowledge;
May all beings become vessels of the supreme meritorious quali­
ties of the lineage of all buddhas of the three periods of time
who are able to absorb and retain everything that has been
taught by the wondrous voices of all buddhas; and
May all beings become vessels containing the sites of enlight­
enment of the congregations of all tathāgatas in all worlds
throughout the Dharma realm and the realm of empty space

646

The Flower Adornment Sutra
who become great men foremost among those who are praised
who request all buddhas to turn the wheel of right Dharma.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving vessels. They are made wishing to every­
where enable all beings to accomplish the complete fulfillment of
the vessel of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva’s conduct and vows.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva presents gifts
of all kinds of different carriages adorned with the many kinds of
jewels, offering them up to all buddhas, bodhisattvas, teachers,
elders, good spiritual friends, śrāvaka disciples, pratyekabuddhas, and
all the countless other various kinds of fields of merit such as these,
including even those who are poor or solitary.
These many kinds of persons may come from afar, may come
from close by, may come having heard of the bodhisattva’s fame,
may come due to causal affinities with this bodhisattva, may come
due to having heard of the bodhisattva’s past vows to practice giv­
ing, or may have come in response to this bodhisattva’s mental invi­
tation. Then the bodhisattva:
May give jeweled carriages;
May give gold carriages all of which are marvelously adorned,
covered with bell nets, and draped with hanging jeweled
streamers;
May give supremely marvelous lapis lazuli carriages adorned
with countless precious and exotic adornments;
May also give carriages made of silver covered with gold nets and
drawn by fine horses;
May also give carriages adorned with countless jewels of vari­
ous kinds, covered with jeweled nets, and drawn by perfumed
elephants;
May also give sandalwood carriages with wheels made of mar­
velous jewels, canopies made of various gems, jeweled lion
thrones spread with adorned finery, a hundred thousand maid­
ens sitting on them, and a hundred thousand strong men pull­
ing them along, guiding them as they roll onward;
May also give jeweled crystal carriages adorned with many of the
various kinds of marvelous jewels, filled with beautiful maid­
ens, covered with jeweled awnings, and escorted by attendants
with banners and flags alongside;
May also give emerald carriages decorated with many jewels, per­
fumed with various fragrances, sprinkled and adorned with all
different kinds of marvelous flowers, attended by a hundred
thousand maidens holding strands of jewels, drawn smoothly

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
647
along, well able to remain stable even when passing through
hazardous places;
May also give carriages made of solid incense366 with wheels
made of the many kinds of jewels, adornments that are large
and beautiful, jeweled awnings covering them, jeweled nets
draped on them, all kinds of jeweled robes spread out within
them, pure and fine scents circulating within and penetrating
the air outside with their exquisitely wonderful scents pleasing
to people’s minds, countless devas following alongside in atten­
dance, and filled with many kinds of jewels that are given away
whenever it is fitting; and
May also give carriages made of luminous jewels emanating mar­
velous colors of penetrating radiance, their roofs covered with
hanging nets of the many kinds of wondrous jewels, draped all
around with strands of various jewels, dusted with powdered
incense, fragrant and immaculate within and without, and with
dearly admired sons and daughters riding on them.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva offers up to
the Buddha gifts of such carriages adorned with the many kinds
of marvelous jewels, he dedicates these roots of goodness in these
ways:
May all beings understand to make offerings to the most supreme
field of merit, deeply believing that, by giving to the Buddha,
they will acquire measureless karmic rewards;
May all beings single-mindedly turn toward the buddha and
always meet countless pure fields of merit;
May all beings be free of any miserliness when giving to the
tathāgatas and thereby completely perfect the mind of great
relinquishing;
May all beings cultivate the practice of giving to all buddhas,
abandon the aspirations of practitioners of the Two Vehicles,
and attain the Tathāgata’s unimpeded liberation and wisdom
of all-knowledge;
May all beings practice endless giving to all buddhas and enter
the Buddha’s measureless meritorious qualities and wisdom;
May all beings enter the Buddha’s supreme wisdom and succeed
in becoming kings of pure and unexcelled wisdom;
May all beings acquire the Buddha’s unimpeded spiritual super­
knowledge with which they travel everywhere and thus have
no place they wish to go that they do not reach with sovereign
mastery;
May all beings deeply enter the Great Vehicle, acquire measure­
less wisdom, and dwell securely and unshakably in it;

648

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings be able to bring forth the dharma of all-knowl­
edge and become the most supreme field of merit for devas and
humans;
May all beings remain free of resentful thoughts toward any bud­
dha, diligently plant roots of goodness, and delight in seeking
to acquire the wisdom of the Buddha;
May all beings be able to effortlessly travel to all buddha kṣetras
and, in but a single kṣaṇa, go everywhere throughout the
Dharma realm without ever tiring of doing so;
May all beings be able to acquire the bodhisattva’s masterful spiri­
tual superknowledges by which they emanate division bodies
throughout the realms of empty space, drawing near to and
making offerings to all buddhas;
May all beings acquire the incomparable body with which they
go everywhere throughout the ten directions, never tiring of
doing so;
May all beings acquire the vast body with which they swiftly fly
wherever they wish without ever growing weary or retreating;
May all beings acquire the Buddha’s ultimate sovereign mastery
and awesome powers with which, in but a single kṣaṇa, they
manifest throughout all realms of space all the spiritual super­
knowledges and transformations of all buddhas;
May all beings cultivate the peaceful and blissful conduct and
accord with the path of all bodhisattvas;
May all beings be able to acquire the swift practice by which they
completely realize the ten powers, wisdom, and the spiritual
superknowledges;
May all beings be able to enter and go equally and without dif­
ference to the very boundaries of all lands throughout the ten
directions of the Dharma realm;
May all beings practice the conduct of Samantabhadra without
ever turning back, reach the far shore, and attain all-knowl­
edge; and
May all beings ascend to the incomparable vehicle of wisdom,
accord with the nature of dharmas, and perceive reality.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when offering up the many kinds of jeweled carriages
as gifts to all buddhas of the present as well as to their stupas and
shrines after they have entered nirvāṇa. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable beings to acquire the Tathāgata’s unimpeded vehicle
of ultimate emancipation.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
649
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva offers up
to the bodhisattvas and other good spiritual guides gifts of such
carriages adorned with the many kinds of jewels, he dedicates these
roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings always remember the teachings of their good spiri­
tual guides, concentrating diligently on preserving them and
never forgetting them;
May all beings share the same benefits with their good spiritual
guides and everywhere gather in everyone, sharing the same
roots of goodness with them;
May all beings draw near to good spiritual guides, revering them,
making offerings to them, relinquishing everything they have,
and according with their intentions;
May all beings acquire wholesome aspirations and follow along
after their good spiritual guides, never abandoning them;
May all beings always succeed in meeting good spiritual guides,
single-mindedly serving them, and never opposing their teach­
ings;
May all beings delight in good spiritual guides, never abandoning
them, never becoming separated from them, never mixing in
divergent influences, and never mistakenly losing touch with
them;
May all beings be able to devote themselves to their good spiritual
guides, follow their instructions, and never oppose them;
May all beings be accepted by good spiritual guides, cultivate
great kindness, and abandon all evils;
May all beings follow a good spiritual guide and hear the right
Dharma taught by all buddhas;
May all beings develop the same roots of goodness as their good
spiritual guides, receive the fruits of pure karmic deeds, adopt
the same conduct and vows as the bodhisattvas, and completely
realize the ten powers;
May all beings be able to absorb and uphold all the Dharma taught
by their good spiritual guides and then attain all the samādhi
states, wisdom, and spiritual superknowledges;
May all beings be able to absorb and uphold all right Dharma
teachings, cultivate all their practices, and reach the far shore;
May all beings be unimpeded in entering the Great Vehicle and in
ultimately completing the path of all-knowledge;
May all beings succeed in ascending into the vehicle of all-knowl­
edge and in reaching the station of peace and security without
ever turning back;

650

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings understand practice in accordance with reality,
accord with all the dharmas of the Buddha that they hear, and
succeed in achieving the ultimate realization of them all, never
forgetting any of them;
May all beings all be gathered in and accepted by all buddhas and
then attain the unimpeded knowledges and ultimately realize
all dharmas;
May all beings acquire unremitting sovereign mastery of the spir­
itual superknowledges by which they go wherever they wish,
arriving there in but a single mind-moment;
May all beings go and come with sovereign ease and extensively
engage in teaching and guiding others, thereby enabling them
to dwell in the Great Vehicle;
May whatever all beings practice not be undertaken in vain and
may they travel in the wisdom vehicle and reach the ultimate
position; and
May all beings acquire the unimpeded vehicle and reach all places
with the unimpeded knowledges.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving many different kinds of vehicles to good
spiritual guides. He makes these dedications to enable beings to
become fully possessed of the meritorious qualities which are the
same as and no different from those of the buddhas and bodhisat­
tvas.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
vehicles adorned with many jewels to the Sangha, he has the thought
to train in all kinds of giving, the thought to acquire thoroughly
understanding wisdom, the thought to purify the meritorious qual­
ities, the thought to accord with relinquishing, the thought recog­
nizing the rarity of ever meeting the Sangha Jewel, the thought to
have deep faith in the Sangha Jewel, and the thought to accumulate
and retain right teachings. Abiding in such supreme aspirations, he
experiences what he has never before experienced, establishes great
assemblies dedicated to giving, produces measurelessly vast meri­
torious qualities and unimpeded deep faith in the Buddha’s teach­
ings, and then dedicates all these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings everywhere enter the Buddha’s Dharma, remem­
ber it, and never forget it;
May all beings abandon the dharmas of the common person and
then enter the stations of the worthies and āryas;
May all beings swiftly enter the stations of the āryas and be able
to use the Buddha’s Dharma to provide sequential awakening
and guidance to others;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
651
May all beings become revered by the entire world for speech that
is certainly trustworthy;
May all beings skillfully penetrate the identity of all dharmas
and completely realize that the inherent nature of the Dharma
realm is non-dual;
May all beings be born from the Tathāgata’s sphere of wisdom and
be surrounded by those who are well-trained and compliant
with it;
May all beings abide in the dharmas for abandoning defilements
and extinguish all the filth of the afflictions;
May all beings all be able to form the unexcelled Sangha Jewel,
leave the ground of the common person, and enter the commu­
nity of the worthies and āryas;
May all beings diligently cultivate good dharmas, acquire the
unimpeded knowledges, and possess the meritorious qualities
of the āryas;
May all beings acquire the mind of wisdom, not be attached to the
three periods of time, and, in all congregations, possess sover­
eign mastery like that of a king;
May all beings enter the wisdom vehicle and turn the wheel of
right Dharma;
May all beings become completely possessed of the spiritual super­
knowledges with which, in but a single mind-moment, they are
able to travel to an ineffable-ineffable number of worlds;
May all beings be able to take on the space-like body and possess
unimpeded wisdom in all worlds;
May all beings everywhere enter all the congregations of all bud­
dhas throughout empty space and the Dharma realm and per­
fect the foremost practice of the pāramitās;
May all beings acquire the lightest of bodies and extraordinarily
supreme wisdom with which they are all able to everywhere
enter all buddha kṣetras;
May all beings acquire boundless skill in psycho-physical travel
by which they everywhere manifest their bodies in all kṣetras;
May all beings acquire the independent body by which, using the
power of the spiritual superknowledges, they appear every­
where like reflections;
May all beings acquire inconceivable masterful spiritual pow­
ers with which, adapting to those amenable to teaching, they
immediately appear directly before them to train them;
May all beings acquire the unimpeded skillful means by which
they enter the Dharma realm and, in but a single mind-moment,
travel throughout the lands of the ten directions.

652

The Flower Adornment Sutra
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving jewel-adorned carriages to the Sangha Jewel.
He makes these dedications to enable beings to everywhere board
the pure vehicle of unexcelled wisdom and turn the wheel of unim­
peded Dharma wisdom in all worlds.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
gifts of jeweled carriages to śrāvaka disciples and pratyekabuddhas,
he has thoughts such as these: thoughts conceiving of them as fields
of merit, thoughts of reverence, thoughts conceiving of them as an
ocean of meritorious qualities, thoughts of them as able to produce
meritorious qualities and wisdom, thoughts of them as born from
the power of the Tathāgata’s meritorious qualities, thoughts aspiring
to pursue cultivation for hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas
of kalpas, thoughts of the ability to cultivate the bodhisattva prac­
tices for an ineffable number of kalpas, thoughts of liberation from
the bonds of all the māras, thoughts of vanquishing all the armies
of Māra, and thoughts of using the light of wisdom to completely
illuminate the unexcelled Dharma. He then dedicates all these roots
of goodness from giving vehicles in these ways:
May all beings become foremost fields of merit who are trusted
throughout the world and who have completely fulfilled [the
cultivation of] dāna pāramitā;367
May all beings abandon all unbeneficial discourse, always delight
in dwelling alone, and have minds free of extraneous thoughts;
May all beings become supreme and foremost pure fields of merit
who gather in all beings and enable them to cultivate merit-
generating karma;
May all beings become deep reservoirs of wisdom able to provide
beings with measureless and numberless roots of goodness and
karmic rewards;
May all beings abide in unimpeded practices by which they
become completely pure and foremost fields of merit;
May all beings abide in the dharma of noncontentiousness and
completely understand that all dharmas have nothing that they
do368 and have the absence of any [inherently existent] nature
as their nature;
May all beings always be able to draw near to the most superior
fields of merit and completely fulfill the cultivation and devel­
opment of measureless merit;
May all beings become able to manifest countless masterful spiri­
tual superknowledges and serve as pure fields of merit who
gather in all sentient beings;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
653
May all beings become fully developed fields of merit with end­
less meritorious qualities who are able to bestow on beings
the Tathāgata’s ten powers and the fruits of the foremost of all
vehicles;
May all beings become true fields of merit able to accomplish the
fruits [of the path] and realize all-knowledge with its endless
accumulation merit;369
May all beings acquire the methods for extinguishing karmic
offenses and become able to absorb and retain the meanings of
statements from the Buddha’s Dharma they have never heard
before;
May all beings always diligently listen to and absorb all dharmas
of the Buddha and, having heard them, then understand and
awaken to them so that they will not have done so in vain;
May all beings listen to the Buddha’s Dharma, gain a penetrating
comprehension of its ultimate meaning, and then expound on
it in accordance with what they have heard;
May all beings gain resolute faith in and cultivate the Tathāgata’s
teachings and then abandon all the wrong views of the ninety-
six kinds of non-Buddhist traditions;
May all beings always see the worthies and āryas and thus increase
all their supreme roots of goodness;
May the minds of all beings’ always have faith in the eminences
who practice wisdom and may they dwell happily together
with the ārya sages;
May all beings hear the names of buddhas and then not have that
go to waste, this by then becoming able to see with their own
eyes whoever’s names they have heard;
May all beings skillfully distinguish and know the right teachings
of all buddhas and be able to protect all those who preserve the
Dharma of the Buddha;
May all beings always enjoy listening to all dharmas of the
Buddha, absorbing, upholding, studying, and reciting them,
providing instruction in them, and completely illuminating
them; and
May all beings develop resolute faith in the reality-accordant
meritorious qualities of the Buddha’s teachings and then give
whatever they have as reverential offerings.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving all kinds of carriages to śrāvaka disciples and
pratyekabuddhas. He makes these dedications to enable all beings
to become foremost in purity, to acquire wisdom and spiritual

654

The Flower Adornment Sutra
superknowledges, to vigorously cultivate without any indolence,
and to acquire all-knowledge, the powers, and the fearlessnesses.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
carriages adorned with the many kinds of jewels to all the fields of
merit, including the poor, orphans, and the solitary, he joyously and
tirelessly relinquishes everything in accordance with whatever they
seek while still regretfully criticizing himself, saying, “I should have
gone to you to offer these provisions and should not have troubled
you to wear yourselves out coming from such a distance.” Having
said this, he bows, kneels before them, inquires into how they are
doing, and then provides them with whatever they need:
Sometimes he gives them carriages adorned with maṇi jewels that
are filled with the foremost female treasures on the continent
of Jambudvīpa.
Sometimes he gives carriages adorned with gold that are filled
with the female treasures of the human realm.
Sometimes he gives carriages marvelously adorned with lapis
lazuli and filled with singing girls from the inner palace.
Sometimes he gives all different kinds of carriages decorated with
exotic and marvelous jewels and filled with young girls like the
nymphs in the heavens.
Sometimes he gives numberless jewel-adorned carriages filled
with female treasures who are gentle, intelligent, eloquent, and
wise.
Sometimes he gives the marvelous sandalwood carriage in which
he rides.
Sometimes he gives carriages adorned with crystal that are filled
with precious maidens whose countenances are beautiful,
whose forms and features are peerless, who are dressed in for­
mal robes, and who are a delight to all who behold them.
Sometimes he gives carriages adorned with emeralds in which
there ride anointed crown princes.
Sometimes he gives carriages made of solid incense in which all
the sons and daughters ride; and
Sometimes he gives carriages adorned with all kinds of jewels
that are filled with dear, close, and virtuous family members.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva respectfully gives
countless jewel-adorned carriages such as these in accordance with
whatever the recipients seek, thereby enabling them all to be filled
with joy at the complete fulfillment of their wishes. He then dedi­
cates these roots of goodness in these ways:

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
655
May all beings board the vast vehicle of the irreversible and unim­
pededly turning wheel with which they visit those beneath an
inconceivable number of bodhi trees;
May all beings board the vehicle of the great Dharma wisdom
which arises from pure causes and be forever irreversible in
cultivating the bodhisattva practices to the very end of all
future kalpas;
May all beings board the vehicle of the nonexistence of all dhar­
mas, forever abandon all discriminations and attachments, and
thus always cultivate the path to all-knowledge;
May all beings board the upright and direct vehicle free of flattery
and deception and travel with unimpeded sovereign mastery
to all buddha kṣetras;
May all beings accord with and securely abide in the vehicle of
all-knowledge and delight each other with the Dharma of all
buddhas;
May all beings board the vehicle of the bodhisattva’s pure prac­
tices and fulfill the bodhisattva’s tenfold path of emancipa­
tion370 and bliss of samādhi;
May all beings board the vehicle with the four wheels of dwell­
ing in a good land, relying on good people,371 accumulating
supreme merit, and making the great vow and then rely on it to
fulfill the pure brahmacarya372 of all bodhisattvas;
May all beings acquire the vehicle of Dharma light that every­
where illuminates the ten directions and then cultivate and
train in the wisdom and powers of all tathāgatas;
May all beings board the vehicle of the Buddha’s Dharma and
reach the ultimate far shore of perfection in all dharmas;
May all beings enter the vehicle of the inconceivable Dharma of
manifold merit and goodness and then everywhere instruct
those throughout the ten directions in the right path of peace
and security;
May all beings board the vehicle of great giving and relinquish
the defilement of miserliness;
May all beings board the vehicle of pure moral virtue and uphold
boundlessly many moral precepts of purity as vast as the
Dharma realm;
May all beings board the vehicle of patience and always abandon
thoughts of hatred toward beings;
May all beings board the vehicle of great nonretreating vigor and
persistently cultivate the supreme practices for progressing on
the path to bodhi;

656

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings board the vehicle of dhyāna concentration, swiftly
reach the site of enlightenment, and realize the wisdom of
bodhi;
May all beings board the vehicle of wisdom and skillful means
and send forth transformation bodies which fill up the entire
Dharma realm and the realms of all buddhas;
May all beings board the vehicle of the Dharma King, develop the
fearlessnesses, and constantly pursue the universal and kindly
giving of the Dharma of all-knowledge;
May all beings board the vehicle of wisdom free of all attach­
ments, become able to everywhere enter all ten directions, and
remain unmoved in the true nature of dharmas;
May all beings board the vehicle of the Dharma of all buddhas,
manifest the appearance of taking on births throughout the
kṣetras of the ten directions, and still never lose the path of the
Great Vehicle; and
May all beings board the vehicle of the supreme jewel of all-
knowledge and never weary of fulfilling the conduct and vows
of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving carriages adorned with the many kinds of
jewels to all fields of merit including the poor, orphans, and the
solitary. He makes these dedications to enable all beings to possess
measureless wisdom, experience joyous exultation, and then ulti­
mately gain the vehicle of all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes gifts of
“elephant treasures” who by nature are well-trained and compliant,
who are well-developed in seven parts,373 and who are at the age of
robust strength. They each have six immaculate tusks, a red-colored
mouth like a lotus flower, a pure white body like a snowy mountain
that is decorated with a golden banner and covered with a jeweled
net, and a trunk adorned with various kinds of marvelous jewels.
They inspire endless delight in all who see them and they are able
to travel thousands of miles without ever tiring.
Or else he may give fine “horse treasures” who are well-trained,
perfect in all their features, and like the horses of the heavens. They
have luminous adornments made of marvelous jewel moon spheres,
nets of bells made of real gold cover their bodies, and they have a
smooth and even gait that ensures the stability and safety of the
rider. They go wherever the rider wishes, are as swift as the wind,
and travel freely and unimpededly throughout the four continents.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
657
The bodhisattva may offer up these elephant treasures or
horse treasures374 to his parents, to his good spiritual guides, or to
beings who are poor, destitute, or otherwise afflicted by suffering.
His mind being vastly inclusive, he does not become regretful or
miserly. Rather, he only redoubles his celebratory delight and ever
increases his compassionate pity. He cultivates the bodhisattva’s
virtuous qualities, purifies the bodhisattva’s resolve, and dedicates
these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings dwell in the vehicle of training and compliance
and grow in all the bodhisattva’s meritorious qualities;
May all beings acquire the vehicle of skillful means and be able as
fitting to bring forth all dharmas of the Buddha;
May all beings acquire the vehicle of resolute faith and every­
where illuminate the unimpeded wisdom and powers of the
Tathāgata;
May all beings acquire the vehicle in which one sets forth [on the
path] and is everywhere able to make all the great vows;
May all beings perfect the vehicle of the impartial cultivation of
the pāramitās and completely fulfill all impartial roots of good­
ness;
May all beings perfect the vehicle of the Jewels and produce the
unexcelled wisdom jewel of all buddhas’ Dharma;
May all beings attain success in the vehicle adorned with the bod­
hisattva practices and enable the blossoming of the flowers of
all the bodhisattva samādhis;
May all beings acquire the vehicle of boundless speed with which,
for numberless kalpas, they purify the bodhisattva’s resolve
and, with energetic diligence, reflect upon and fully compre­
hend all dharmas;
May all beings attain success in the Great Vehicle of supreme
training and use good skillful means to consummate their
attainment of the bodhisattva grounds; and
May all beings attain success in the most lofty, vast, and solid
Great Vehicle with which they are able to transport all beings
to the station of all-knowledge.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving elephants and horses. He makes these dedi­
cations to enable all beings to board the vehicle of unimpeded wis­
dom, accomplish its perfect fulfillment, and ultimately reach the
buddha vehicle.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
thrones, he may give the lion throne on which he sits, that throne

658

The Flower Adornment Sutra
being high, wide, extraordinarily marvelous, and fine, with feet of
lapis lazuli, spread with soft robes created from gold thread, adorned
with jeweled banners, perfumed with marvelous fragrances, deco­
rated with countless adornments made of various jewels, covered
overhead by a hanging gold net with jeweled bells which, moved
by the breeze, ring forth marvelous sounds. Surrounded by decora­
tions made of a myriad kinds of exotic gems, it is a throne that all
the people would gaze up at in admiration, one that only a great
consecrated king might sit on as he proclaimed Dharma teachings
respectfully followed by the myriad neighboring states.
Such a king also adorns himself with marvelous jewels such
as universal luminescence jewels, sapphires, giant sapphires, and
maṇi jewels from the finest treasuries as bright and pure as the sun
or as clear and cool as the moon, all of which are arrayed in pro­
fusion everywhere like the many stars. These supremely marvel­
ous adornments of foremost and incomparable varieties include
extraordinarily marvelous jewels from the ocean, solid banner jew­
els from the ocean with strange patterns and exotic appearances,
and all kinds of other adornments.
Of all those in the great assembly, he is the most revered and
most superior. His head is crowned with an immaculate jeweled
headband of jambūnada gold. He is one who has ascended to the
position of a consecrated ruler holding sway over the continent of
Jambudvīpa, one who possesses the measureless power of great
awe-inspiring virtue, who takes kindness as foremost in how
he rules, and who causes all adversaries and enemies to submit.
Wherever his teachings and edicts reach, there are none who do not
accept and obey them.
When serving as a wheel-turning king, he bestows hundreds
of thousands of myriads of koṭīs of countlessly many kinds of jew­
eled thrones, giving them to the tathāgatas, the foremost among all
fields of merit, to the bodhisattvas, the true good spiritual guides,
to the Sangha Jewel of worthies and āryas, the masters who teach
the Dharma, to their parents, to their lineage relations, to śrāvaka
disciples and pratyekabuddhas, to those who have set out in the bod­
hisattva vehicle, to stupas honoring tathāgatas, and so forth, giving
them even to all those who are poor or solitary, always bestowing
on them everything they may need. He dedicates these roots of
goodness in these ways:
May all beings sit on the throne of bodhi and be able to awaken to
the right Dharma of all buddhas;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
659
May all beings sit on the throne of sovereign mastery, attain sov­
ereign mastery in the Dharma that not even mountains of vajra
could destroy, and may they be able to vanquish all the armies
of Māra;
May all beings acquire the Buddha’s lion throne of sovereign mas­
tery and become one to whom all beings look up in admiration;
May all beings acquire an ineffable-ineffable number of many
different kinds of extraordinarily marvelous jewel-adorned
thrones, attain sovereign mastery in the Dharma, and provide
teaching and guidance to beings;
May all beings acquire the most excellent thrones in the three
kinds of worlds375 and become adorned with vast roots of good­
ness;
May all beings acquire the throne that is everywhere present
throughout an ineffable-ineffable number of worlds which
could never be fully praised even in an asaṃkhyeya kalpa;
May all beings acquire the seat of great and deeply esoteric merit
in which one’s body fills up the entire Dharma realm;
May all beings acquire inconceivably many different kinds of jew­
eled thrones and take up extensive Dharma giving to the very
beings they bring to mind in making their original vows;
May all beings acquire excellent and marvelous thrones and man­
ifest ineffably many displays of all buddhas’ spiritual super­
knowledges; and
May all beings acquire all kinds of jeweled thrones, all kinds of
perfumed thrones, all kinds of flower-adorned thrones, all
kinds of robe-draped thrones, all kinds of thrones adorned
with garlands, all kinds of maṇi jewel thrones, all kinds of jew­
eled thrones of inconceivably many different kinds that are
adorned with lapis lazuli and other jewels, thrones from incal­
culably and ineffably many worlds, adorned and pure thrones
from all worlds, and all kinds of vajra thrones in which they
manifest the Tathāgata’s awesome virtue and sovereign mas­
tery and realize the utmost right enlightenment.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving jeweled thrones. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable beings to acquire the throne of world-transcending
great bodhi and naturally awaken to all dharmas of the Buddha.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives all kinds
of jeweled canopies. These canopies are extraordinary, of the sort
used by the honored nobility, adorned with many different kinds
of large jewels. Of the hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of

660

The Flower Adornment Sutra
supremely marvelous canopies, these are foremost. Their support
poles are made of the many kinds of jewels. They are covered with
marvelous nets made of jeweled cords and gold bells which hang
down all around and they have strands of maṇi jewel necklaces
draped down at regular intervals. They move with the subtle breeze,
making marvelous harmonious sounds. They are filled with many
different kinds of jewel treasuries of pearls and jade and they are
adorned with countless exotic gems. The wondrous fragrances of
sandalwood and agarwood incenses perfume them all. Bright and
pure jambūnada gold and countless hundreds of thousands of koṭīs
of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of the many marvelous kinds of precious
things complete their adornments.
With a pure mind, he offers these up to the Buddha and to all
their stupas after their nirvāṇa, or, for the sake of the Dharma, he
bestows them on bodhisattvas, good spiritual guides, or renowned
masters of the Dharma, bestows them on parents, bestows them
on the Sangha Jewel, or presents them as offerings to all dharmas
of the Buddha, or bestows them on the many different kinds of
fields of merit among beings, or bestows them on teachers within
the Sangha or their venerated elder eminences, or bestows them
on those who have but recently made their initial resolve to attain
bodhi, and so forth, bestowing them as well on the poor and the
solitary, giving them everything they seek. He dedicates these roots
of goodness in these ways:
May all beings diligently cultivate roots of goodness by which
to shelter themselves and always receive the protection of the
buddhas;
May all beings take meritorious qualities and wisdom as their
canopies and thus forever abandon all the world’s afflictions;
May all beings become sheltered by good dharmas and rid them­
selves of the world’s defilements and feverish afflictions;
May all beings acquire the treasury of wisdom and thus enable
the multitude to never grow tired of seeing them;
May all beings shade themselves with the quiescent dharmas of
pristine purity and thus acquire the ultimate and indestructible
dharmas of the Buddha;
May all beings shelter themselves with goodness and ultimately
acquire the Tathāgata’s pure Dharma body;
May all beings become universally covering canopies who use
their ten powers and wisdom to everywhere shelter the world;
May all beings acquire the marvelous wisdom with which they
transcend the three periods of time and become free of all defil­
ing attachments;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
661
May all beings gain the canopy of becoming worthy of offerings
and become supreme fields of merit receiving the offerings of
everyone; and
May all beings acquire the most superior of canopies by acquiring
unexcelled wisdom and naturally attaining enlightenment.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving canopies. They are made:
To enable all beings to acquire the canopy of the sovereign master­
ies and become able to uphold all good dharmas;
To enable all beings to use but a single canopy to everywhere
cover all kṣetras throughout all of empty space and the Dharma
realm and become irreversible in [becoming able to] manifest
the masterful spiritual superknowledges of all buddhas;
To enable all beings to make offerings to the Buddha by using but
a single canopy to adorn all worlds of the ten directions;
To enable all beings to use marvelous banners, flags, and jeweled
canopies to make offerings to all tathāgatas;
To enable all beings to acquire a universally adorning canopy that
everywhere covers all buddha lands without exception;
To enable all beings to acquire the vast canopy that everywhere
covers beings and enables them all to develop resolute faith in
the Buddha;
To enable all beings to make offerings of an ineffable number of
marvelous jeweled canopies to a single Buddha and then make
offerings in the same way to every one of an ineffable number
of buddhas;
To enable all beings to acquire the high and wide canopy of the
Buddha’s bodhi that everywhere covers all tathāgatas;
To enable all beings to acquire canopies adorned with all kinds of
maṇi jewels, canopies adorned with all kinds of jeweled neck­
laces, canopies adorned with all kinds of solid incense, cano­
pies with pure adornments of many different kinds of jewels,
canopies with pure adornments made of measurelessly many
jewels, and canopies with pure adornments of vast arrays of
jewels that are covered with jeweled nets from which jeweled
bells hang down, ringing forth sublime sounds in response to
the movements of the breeze and everywhere sheltering the
bodies of all buddhas in all worlds throughout the Dharma
realm and the realms of empty space;
To enable all beings to acquire the canopy adorned with unim­
peded and unobstructed wisdom that everywhere covers all
tathāgatas;

662

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Because he wishes to enable all beings to acquire the foremost
kinds of wisdom;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire the adorn­
ment of the Buddha’s meritorious qualities;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to develop the pure
aspiration to acquire the Buddha’s meritorious qualities;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire the mind
jewel possessed of measureless and boundless sovereign mas­
teries;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to fulfill the realiza­
tion of sovereign wisdom in all dharmas;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to use all their roots of
goodness to everywhere shelter everyone;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to successfully acquire
the canopy of supreme wisdom;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to successfully acquire
the universally covering canopy of the ten powers;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to use a single canopy
to completely cover all buddha kṣetras in the Dharma realm;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to attain sovereign
mastery in the Dharma and become kings of the Dharma;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire the mind of
sovereign mastery possessed of great awesome virtue;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire vast wis­
dom that is never lost;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire measureless
meritorious qualities which everywhere shelter everyone and
result in the ultimate realization for all;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to use all the meritori­
ous qualities to shelter their own minds;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to shelter beings with
the impartial mind;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire great wis­
dom’s canopy of impartiality;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to possess the skillful
means of great dedications;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire the pure
mind of supreme aspirations;
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire the purified
mind of wholesome aspirations; and
Because he also wishes to enable all beings to acquire the great
dedications with which to everywhere shelter all beings.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
663
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva may give many
different kinds of marvelous banners and flags with poles made
of the many kinds of jewels, flags made of jeweled silk, banners
made of all different kinds of multi-colored silk, jeweled nets hang­
ing down over them, and brilliant colors everywhere filling them.
Their jeweled bells move gently, creating harmonies of sound and
rhythm. Exotic and marvelous jewels shaped like crescent moons
and jambūnada gold that outshines the sun are arrayed on the ban­
ners, while all the many different kinds of marvelous things cor­
responding to the fruits of the karma in all the different worlds are
used as adornments. Numberless thousands of myriads of koṭīs of
nayutas of marvelous banners and flags such as these with mutually
reflected intermittently shining brilliant light rays produce immac­
ulate radiant adornments which shine everywhere over the great
earth and fill all the buddha kṣetras throughout the ten directions of
space and the Dharma realm.
With a pure mind and resolute faith, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva
makes gifts of countless banners and flags such as these, sometimes
giving them to all buddhas of the present as well as to all the stupas
of the buddhas who have entered nirvāṇa, sometimes giving them
to the Dharma Jewel, sometimes giving them to the Sangha Jewel,
sometimes giving them to bodhisattvas and good spiritual guides,
sometimes giving them to śrāvaka disciples and pratyekabuddhas,
sometimes giving them to the Great Assembly, and sometimes giv­
ing them to others including all who come seeking them. He gives
them to everyone everywhere and then dedicates all these roots of
goodness in these ways:
May all beings be able to establish all kinds of roots of goodness
and erect banners and flags of indestructible merit;
May all beings establish the banners and flags of sovereign mas­
tery in all dharmas and then revere, cherish and diligently pre­
serve and protect them;
May all beings always write out right Dharma on jeweled silks
and protect and uphold the Dharma treasuries of the buddhas
and the bodhisattvas;
May all beings erect high and easily seen banners, light the lamp
of wisdom, and everywhere illuminate the world;
May all beings erect the banner of steadfastness and be able to
utterly destroy and eliminate all the works of the māras;
May all beings erect the banner of the wisdom powers that no
māra could ever destroy;
May all beings acquire the nārāyaṇa banner of great wisdom and
utterly demolish all the banners and flags of worldly ways;

664

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings acquire the greatly radiant banner of the wisdom
sun and use the sunlight of wisdom to everywhere illuminate
the Dharma realm;
May all beings possess an abundance of countless jewel-adorned
banners and fill all the worlds of the ten directions, making
offerings to all buddhas; and
May all beings acquire the banner of the Tathāgata and completely
demolish the ninety-six kinds of wrong views of the non-Bud­
dhist traditions.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving banners and flags. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable all beings to acquire the banner of the extremely
profound, lofty, and vast bodhisattva practices as well as the banner
of all bodhisattvas’ practice of spiritual superknowledges and the
pure path.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva opens up the
treasury of the many jewels and distributes hundreds of thousands
of koṭīs of nayutas of every kind of marvelous and precious jewel,
giving them to all the numberless beings, freely giving them with a
mind free of miserliness. He then dedicates all these roots of good­
ness in these ways:
May all beings always be able to see the Buddha Jewel, abandon
delusion, and cultivate right mindfulness;
May all beings be able to fully possess the light of the Dharma
Jewel and then preserve the Dharma treasury of all buddhas;
May all beings be able to attract and support the entire Sangha
Jewel and never grow weary of everywhere providing them
with offerings;
May all beings acquire the unexcelled mind jewel of all-knowl­
edge and purify the bodhi resolve without ever retreating from
it;
May all beings acquire the wisdom jewel and everywhere pen­
etrate all dharmas with a mind free of doubts;
May all beings fully possess the jewels of the bodhisattva’s meri­
torious qualities and then reveal and expound on measureless
wisdom;
May all beings acquire countless jewels of marvelous meritorious
qualities and cultivate and attain right enlightenment, the ten
powers, and wisdom;
May all beings acquire sublime samādhis and the jewels of the
sixteen types of knowledge376 and reach the ultimate fulfillment
of vast wisdom;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
665
May all beings succeed in becoming foremost jewels among the
fields of merit and awaken to and enter the Tathāgata’s unex­
celled wisdom; and
May all beings succeed in becoming foremost among the lords
of the unexcelled jewels and use inexhaustible eloquence to
expound on all dharmas.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving the many jewels. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable all beings to succeed in fully developing the fore­
most jewel of wisdom, the jewel of the Tathāgata’s unimpeded pure
eye.377
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva may give
many different kinds of marvelous adornments, including all kinds
of adornments for the body that enable the body to seem beauti­
ful, marvelous, and such that no one would fail to praise it. The
bodhisattva-mahāsattva looks on all beings equally, just as he would
look on an only son, wishing to enable them all to acquire body-
beautifying adornments and to attain the world’s most supreme
happiness, the bliss of the Buddha’s wisdom, to become established
in the Dharma of the Buddha, and to benefit beings. He diligently
practices giving them hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of
the many different kinds of extraordinarily marvelous jewel adorn­
ments. When he practices such giving, he dedicates all these roots
of goodness in these ways:
May all beings perfect the unexcelled marvelous adornments and
adorn humans and devas with all the pure meritorious quali­
ties and wisdom;
May all beings acquire the adorning signs of purity and adorn
their bodies with pure merit;
May all beings acquire the supremely marvelous adorning signs
and adorn their bodies with the signs of hundredfold merit;
May all beings acquire the adorning signs free of abnormalities
and adorn their bodies with all the signs;
May all beings acquire the adorning sign of wholesome and pure
speech and become completely endowed with all the different
kinds of inexhaustible eloquence;
May all beings acquire the adorning sign of the voice possessed
of all the meritorious qualities with which their voices are clear
and pure and pleasing to all who hear them;
May all beings acquire the adorning sign of the delightful speech
of the buddhas which enables all beings who hear the Dharma
to rejoice and take up the cultivation of the pure practices;

666

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings acquire the adorning sign of the mind with which
they enter deep dhyāna absorptions and see all buddhas every­
where;
May all beings acquire the adorning sign of the complete-retention
dhāraṇīs with which they clearly illuminate the right Dharma of
all buddhas; and
May all beings acquire the adorning sign of wisdom and adorn
their minds with the wisdom of the Buddha.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving all kinds of adornments. He makes these
dedications to enable all beings to become fully equipped with the
perfectly full adornment of all the measureless Buddha dharmas,
meritorious qualities, and wisdom while also forever abandoning
all forms of arrogance and neglectfulness.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives even the
maṇi jewel crown and topknot jewel received in his crown-anoint­
ing consecration as a sovereign monarch, everywhere giving such
things to all beings with a mind free of miserliness as he always
diligently cultivates becoming a great benefactor, cultivating and
training in the wisdom of giving, increasing the faculty of relin­
quishing, and developing wise skillful means. With a mind made
vast, he gives to everyone and then dedicates all his roots of good­
ness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the crown-anointing consecration with all
dharmas of the Buddha and attain all-knowledge;
May all beings become endowed with the prominence on the
crown,378 acquire the foremost wisdom, and reach the far shore;
May all beings use the jewel of marvelous wisdom to everywhere
attract beings and enable them all to ultimately reach the very
summit of meritorious qualities;
May all beings be able to fully develop the summit crowned with
the jewel of wisdom and become worthy to receive the rever­
ence of the world;
May all beings adorn their heads with the crown of wisdom and
become kings in the sovereign mastery of all dharmas;
May all beings affix atop the crowns of their heads the bright
pearl of wisdom, [the utmost peak of the light from which is]
invisible to all in the world;
May all beings become worthy of receiving the world’s reverential
bows and perfect the summit of wisdom that brightly illumi­
nates the Dharma of the Buddha;
May all beings crown their heads with the crown adorned with
the ten powers and possess an ocean of pure wisdom jewels;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
667
May all beings reach the peak of the great grounds, acquire all-
knowledge, perfect the ten powers, and crush the followers of
Māra at the summit of the desire realm; and
May all beings develop the foremost and unexcelled king of sum­
mits and acquire the radiant summit of all-knowledge that no
one’s light can outshine.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving jeweled crowns. He makes these dedications
to enable all beings to reach foremost wisdom’s station of supreme
purity and acquire the marvelous jeweled crown adorned with the
maṇi jewel of wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva sees that
there are beings who are in prison, in a dark place, whose bodies are
restrained with fetters, manacles, or the cangue so that, standing or
sitting, they are uncomfortable, who are assailed by numerous suf­
ferings, who have no relatives or friends, who have no refuge and
no one to rescue them, who are naked, hungry, and emaciated, or
who are subjected to intense cruelties that are difficult to endure,
having seen this, the bodhisattva is then willing to relinquish all
that he owns to rescue them, including all his wealth and jewels,
his wife, son, retinue, and even his own body. He then goes to the
prison to rescue those beings, doing so in the same ways as did Great
Compassion Bodhisattva or King of Wondrous Eyes Bodhisattva.
Once he has rescued them, he then gives them all whatever they
need, puts an end to their sufferings and troubles, enables them to
find peace and security, and afterward gives them the unexcelled
jewel of Dharma, thus enabling them to set aside neglectfulness,
become securely established in roots of goodness, and gain irre­
versible resolve in following the Buddha’s teachings.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva rescues
beings from imprisonment, he dedicates all his roots of goodness in
these ways:
May all beings gain ultimate liberation from the entangling bonds
of desire;
May all beings cut off their drifting along in the river of saṃsāra
and ascend the far shore of wisdom;
May all beings extinguish delusion, develop wisdom, and become
liberated from the entangling bonds of all afflictions;
May all beings destroy the bonds of the three realms of existence
and gain the ultimate emancipation of all-knowledge;
May all beings forever cut off all the bonds of the afflictions and
reach the ground free of afflictions and free of obstacles on the
far shore of wisdom;

668

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings abandon all stirrings of thought, reflections,
and discriminations and enter the ground of equanimity and
unshakable wisdom;
May all beings become liberated from the bonds of the desires,
forever abandon all worldly desires, and become free of all the
defiling attachments within the three realms of existence;
May all beings acquire supreme aspirations and always receive all
buddhas’ instruction in the gateways to the Dharma;
May all beings acquire the liberated mind free of attachments and
free of bonds that is as vast as the Dharma realm and as exten­
sive as empty space; and
May all beings acquire the bodhisattva’s spiritual superknowl­
edges, train beings in all worlds, and enable them to transcend
the world and abide in the Great Vehicle.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when rescuing beings suffering from imprisonment. He
makes these dedications to enable beings to everywhere enter the
Tathāgata’s wisdom grounds.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva sees that
there is someone in prison tied down in five places, undergoing
excruciating suffering, surrounded, driven along, and led to the exe­
cution ground, about to have his life cut short, on the verge of hav­
ing to relinquish all the pleasures of Jambudvīpa and leave behind
relatives and friends, placed on a high slab to be sliced apart with
knives, about to have his body impaled on lances, or swaddled in
oily clothes and then roasted by being set alight and burned, about
to be subjected to the tortures of different kinds of sufferings such
as these, the bodhisattva, having witnessed this, is then willing to
sacrifice his own body and stand in for the prisoner in taking on
these sufferings in the same way as did Ajita Bodhisattva, King of
Especially Superior Practices Bodhisattva, and the countless other
great bodhisattvas who, for the sake of other beings, sacrificed their
own bodies to take on all kinds of excruciating sufferings for others.
The Bodhisattva then tells the prison warden, “I want to sac­
rifice my body in trade for his life so that you can instead inflict
sufferings such as these on me just the same as if you were punish­
ing that man, doing so however you please. Even if my sufferings
need to be greater than his would be, multiplied even an asaṃkhyeya
of times beyond that, I will still undergo it to enable him to be
released. If I were to witness him being about to be executed and
yet fail to relinquish my own life as a ransom to rescue him from his
suffering, then I would not qualify as someone who abides in the

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
669
bodhisattva’s resolve. Why? It is to rescue and protect all beings that
I made the resolve to attain bodhi and gain all-knowledge.”
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva sacrifices his own
body to rescue other beings, he dedicates his roots of goodness in
these ways:
May all beings acquire the endless ultimate life and forever leave
behind all disasters and tormenting afflictions;
May all beings dwell in reliance on all buddhas and receive the
prediction of their realization of bodhi, attainment of all-
knowledge, and possession of the ten powers;
May all beings rescue all sentient beings and enable them to
become free of fear and forever escape the wretched destinies;
May all beings acquire everlasting life and enter the sphere of
undying wisdom;
May all beings forever leave behind all adversaries and enemies,
become free of all disasters and difficulties, and always be
drawn forth by all buddhas and good spiritual friends;
May all beings abandon all knives, swords, weapons, and other
instruments of evil that inflict suffering and may they cultivate
all the different kinds of pure and wholesome karma;
May all beings become fearless and vanquish the armies of Māra
beneath the bodhi tree;
May all beings leave behind all fear of the Great Assembly,379
have minds that, with regard to the unexcelled Dharma, are
pure and fearless, and become able to roar the roar of the most
supreme of all lions;
May all beings acquire the unimpeded wisdom of the Lion
[Among Men] and cultivate right livelihood in all worlds; and
May all beings reach the station of fearlessness and always remain
mindful of rescuing and protecting all suffering beings.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when sacrificing his own life to rescue prisoners who are
about to be executed. He makes these dedications to enable beings
to leave behind the sufferings of saṃsāra and acquire the supremely
marvelous bliss of the Tathāgata.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
to supplicants, he gives even the uṣṇīṣa crown and adjoining skin
from the top of his head in the same way as did Jewel Crown King
Bodhisattva, Supremely Marvelous Body Bodhisattva, and count­
less other bodhisattvas such as these. When at this time the bod­
hisattva sees a supplicant coming, his mind is filled with joy and he
says to him, “If now you need this uṣṇīṣa crown and adjoining skin

670

The Flower Adornment Sutra
from atop my head, you may take it from me. This uṣṇīṣa crown on
my head is foremost of all on this continent of Jambudvīpa.”
When he says this, his mind remains unwavering and free of
confusion. He has no thought of any other actions other than to
renounce the world, resolutely seek the ultimate purity of quies­
cence, and progress with intense diligence and straightforwardness
of character toward all-knowledge. He then takes up a sharp blade,
cuts away the uṣṇīṣa crown and adjoining skin from atop his head,
and, with his right knee touching the ground and ten fingers and
two palms pressed together, he single-mindedly gives this to him.
With right mindfulness, he brings to mind all buddhas of the
three periods of time and the practices of the bodhisattvas, where­
upon he is filled with great joy and especially supreme aspiration.
His mind then comes to a thorough understanding of all dharmas
due to which he does not seize on the pain. Completely realizing
that painful feelings are signless and unborn, he understands that
all feelings arise in mutual dependence on conditions and are imper­
manent. Thus he thinks: “I should practice great relinquishing in
the same way as all bodhisattvas of the past, future, and present,
arousing deep faith and delight and proceeding with my irrevers­
ible quest for all-knowledge without having to rely on instruction
from others or on the power of the good spiritual guide.”
When this bodhisattva-mahāsattva performs these acts of giv­
ing, he then dedicates all his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the summit the peak of which is invisible
to all and develop the bodhisattva’s stupa-like uṣṇīṣa crown;
May all beings acquire the indigo blue hair, the vajra hair, and the
fine and soft hair, and become able to extinguish all of beings’
afflictions;
May all beings acquire the moist and glossy hair, the dense and
fine hair, and the hair that does not grow down past the tem­
ples or on the forehead;
May all beings acquire the soft hair and the hair whose growth
stops at the temples and forehead;
May all beings acquire the hair that grows, like the svastika char­
acter, in a rightward swirling pattern;
May all beings acquire the hair that looks like that of the Buddha
and forever leave behind all habitual karmic propensities asso­
ciated with the afflictions and fetters;
May all beings acquire shining hair the light from which illumi­
nates all the worlds of the ten directions;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
671
May all beings acquire the hair that does not become tousled and,
like the Tathāgata’s hair, is clean, marvelous, and never in dis­
array;
May all beings acquire the stupa-like crown hair of those worthy
of offerings that causes those who see it to feel as if they were
looking at the Buddha’s hair; and
May all beings acquire the Tathāgata’s hair that does not become
dirty and forever separate from the dark and obscuring defile­
ments.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving the uṣṇīṣa crown and adjoining skin on
the top of his head. He makes these dedications to enable beings
to acquire quiescent minds, perfect fulfillment of the dhāraṇīs, and
ultimate realization of the Tathāgata’s knowledge of all modes and
ten powers.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing to
give his eyes to those who come seeking them, engaging in the same
kind of kindly giving practiced by Joyous Practice Bodhisattva,
Moonlight King Bodhisattva, and countless other bodhisattvas
such as these. When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his eyes,
he arouses the pure thought to give his eyes, he arouses the pure
thought of the wisdom eye, he arouses thought reliant on the light
of the Dharma, he arouses thought directly contemplating the unex­
celled path of the Buddha, he makes the resolve to dedicate merit
to the attainment of vast wisdom, he makes the resolve to engage
in giving comparable to that of the bodhisattvas of the three peri­
ods of time, he gains the eye of unimpeded vision and arouses the
thought of indestructible pure faith, and he arouses thoughts of joy­
ful acceptance toward those who come to beg from him, doing so to
achieve ultimate realization of all the spiritual superknowledges, to
give birth to the buddha eye, to increase the vastness of his resolve
to attain bodhi, to cultivate great kindness and compassion, and to
control and subdue the six sense faculties. It is with regard to dhar­
mas such as these that he arouses these thoughts of his.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his
eyes, he feels fondness for those who come seeking donations from
him and establishes an assembly of benefactors for their benefit to
increase the strength of the Dharma’s power to enable the aban­
doning of worldly desire, views, and neglectfulness, and to enable
the cutting off of the bonds of desire and the cultivation of bodhi.
Adapting to whatever others are seeking, his mind remains peace­
ful and unmoving. He does not oppose their wishes and he enables

672

The Flower Adornment Sutra
them all to be satisfied while always according with the non-dual
practice of relinquishing. He then dedicates these roots of goodness
in these ways:
May all beings acquire the supreme eyes with which they instruct
and guide everyone;
May all beings acquire the unimpeded eyes and open up the vast
treasury of wisdom;
May all beings acquire the light of the pure fleshly eye which pro­
vides such penetrating discernment that nothing can interfere
with its vision;
May all beings acquire the pure heavenly eye with which they see
the karmic effects in all beings’ births and deaths;
May all beings acquire the pure Dharma eye with which they are
able to accord with and penetrate the Tathāgata’s sphere of cog­
nition;
May all beings acquire the wisdom eye with which they abandon
all discriminations, grasping, and attachment;
May all beings fully possess the Buddha eye and be able to awaken
to all dharmas;
May all beings perfect the universal eye with which they gain
unimpeded cognition of all spheres of experience;
May all beings develop the pure eyes free of the cataracts of delu­
sion with which they fully realize that the realms of beings are
empty and devoid of [inherent] existence; and
May all beings fully possess the unimpeded pure eyes with
which they are all able to reach the ultimate realization of the
Tathāgata’s ten powers.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his eyes. He makes these dedications to
enable beings to acquire the purified eyes of those with all-knowl­
edge.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is able to give
his ears and nose to those who come seeking to acquire them, doing
so in the same way as did King of Supreme Practices Bodhisattva,
Hate-Free Supremacy Bodhisattva, and countless other bodhisat­
tvas such as these. When he gives, he personally bestows his gift
on the supplicant, single-mindedly cultivates the bodhisattva prac­
tices, carries forth the lineage of the buddhas, and is born into the
family of the tathāgatas.
He remains mindful of the practice of giving as cultivated by all
bodhisattvas and always diligently applies himself to manifesting
the bodhi of all buddhas, their pure faculties, and their meritorious

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
673
qualities and wisdom. He contemplates the three realms of exis­
tence as devoid of even a single durable aspect. He wishes to always
be able to see all buddhas and bodhisattvas while at the same time
also bearing in mind the Dharma of all buddhas and realizing that
the body is false, empty, devoid of anything at all that exists, and
devoid of anything he might covet or cherish.
When the bodhisattva gives his ears or his nose in this way, his
mind always remains quiescent, for he has tamed all his sense fac­
ulties. He rescues beings from all their perilous difficulties, devel­
ops every kind of wisdom and meritorious quality, enters the ocean
of great giving, comprehends the meanings of the dharmas, fully
cultivates all aspects of the path, relies on wisdom in his practice,
develops sovereign mastery of the Dharma, and thus transforms
the body that is not durable into a durable body.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his
ears, he dedicates his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire ears with unimpeded hearing and every­
where hear the sounds of all teaching of the Dharma;
May all beings acquire ears with unobstructed hearing and be
able to completely understand all sounds;
May all beings acquire the Tathāgata’s ears that clearly understand
everything and have nothing they are blocked from hearing;
May all beings acquire the purified sense of hearing and not pro­
duce discriminating thoughts because of the ear sense base;
May all beings acquire ears free of deafness and prevent all igno­
rant states of consciousness from ever arising at all;
May all beings acquire ears that hear everything throughout the
Dharma realm and fully discern the sounds of the Dharma of
all buddhas;
May all beings acquire ears with unimpeded hearing and awaken
to all the unimpeded dharmas;
May all beings acquire ears with indestructible hearing with
which they thoroughly know all doctrines and become invul­
nerable to refutation by anyone;
May all beings acquire the universally hearing ears that, with
their vast and clear range of hearing, are the kings of all ears;
and
May all beings become fully endowed with the heavenly ear and
the Buddha ear.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his ears. He makes these dedications to
enable all beings to acquire the purified ear.

674

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his
nose, he makes dedications in these ways: “May all beings acquire
a prominent and straight nose, a nose that is one of the secondary
signs,380 a nose with a fine appearance, a nose with a delightful
appearance, a nose that is pure and marvelous, a congenial look­
ing nose, a high and prominent nose, a nose that subdues hostility,
a good-looking nose, a nose like that of a tathāgata. And may all
beings acquire a face that has abandoned anger, a face familiar with
all dharmas, a face free of obstacles, a good-looking face, a conge­
nial looking face, a pure face, a face of one who is free of faults, the
round and full face of a tathāgata, a face that may go everywhere, a
face with countless exquisite aspects.” These are the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of goodness when giving his
nose. He makes these dedications:
To enable beings to ultimately gain entry into the Dharma of all
buddhas;
To enable beings to ultimately accept the Dharma of all buddhas.
To enable beings to ultimately fully know the Dharma of all bud­
dhas;
To enable beings to ultimately preserve the Dharma of all bud­
dhas;
To enable beings to ultimately always see all tathāgatas;
To enable all beings to realize the Buddha’s Dharma gateways;
To enable beings to ultimately develop the indestructible mind;
To enable all beings to fully illuminate the right Dharma of all
buddhas;
To enable beings to everywhere purify the lands of all buddhas;
and
To enable all beings to acquire the Tathāgata’s body possessed of
great awesome powers.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his ears and nose.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has
become established on the solid ground of sovereign mastery, he
is able to give his own teeth to beings, doing so in the same way
as did Floral Teeth King Bodhisattva, Six Tusk Elephant King
Bodhisattva, and countless other such bodhisattvas from the past.
When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his teeth, he does so with
types of mind that are as pure, rare, and difficult to encounter as
the blooming of the udumbara flower, which is to say: He gives
with an inexhaustible mind; gives with a mind of great faith; gives

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
675
with a mind that perfects measureless relinquishing one step at a
time; gives with a mind that controls his sense faculties; gives with
a mind willing to give everything; gives with a mind aspiring to
all-knowledge; gives with a mind intending to make beings happy;
gives with great generosity, ultimate generosity, supreme generos­
ity, and the most supreme generosity; and gives with a mind that is
willing to sacrifice his own body for others’ needs without resent­
ment. At this time, the bodhisattva dedicates all his roots of good­
ness in these ways:
May all beings acquire sharp white teeth for which supreme stu­
pas are made to receive the offerings of devas and humans;
May all beings acquire straight and even teeth which, as with
the Buddha’s major marks and secondary signs, are free of any
gaps;
May all beings acquire disciplined minds which skillfully pursue
the practice of the bodhisattva’s pāramitās;
May all beings have mouths [with speech that is] wholesome and
pure and teeth that are gleaming white and clearly visible;
May all beings acquire memorably adorned teeth and mouths that
are clean and free of any unsightly appearances;
May all beings have perfectly formed teeth, the full forty in their
number, which always emanate various kinds of rare and mar­
velous fragrances;
May all beings have well-trained minds and teeth with swirl­
ing svastika patterns that are as fresh and immaculate as white
lotuses;
May all beings have fresh and clean mouths and lips and gleam­
ing white teeth that emanate countless light rays that produce
pervasive dazzling illumination;
May all beings have solid and sharp teeth that leave no grains still
whole once eaten, and may they become superior fields of merit
free of attachment to flavors; and
May all beings always radiate light from between their teeth with
which they pass on the foremost predictions [of future buddha­
hood] to all bodhisattvas.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his teeth. He makes these dedications to
enable beings to possess all-knowledge and pure wisdom about all
dharmas.
Sons of the Buddha, if someone comes and seeks to be given
the tongue of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva, he responds with a kind
and compassionate mind, with gentle speech, and with affectionate

676

The Flower Adornment Sutra
speech, doing so in the same way as did those bodhisattvas of the
past such as Handsome Countenance King Bodhisattva, Never-
Retreating Bodhisattva, and countless other bodhisattvas such as
these.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is under­
going rebirth in all the rebirth destinies, there may be even count­
less hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of beings who come
and seek to acquire his tongue. At such times, the bodhisattva has
that person sit on the lion throne and, with a mind free of anger,
with a mind free of injurious intent, with a mind free of resentment,
with a mind of great awesome virtue, with a mind born from the
lineage of the buddhas, with a mind that dwells where bodhisat­
tvas dwell, with a mind that is never turbid or scattered, with a
mind that abides in immense power, with a mind free of attachment
to the body, and with a mind free of attachment to being able to
speak—he kneels with both knees on the ground, opens his mouth,
extends his tongue to show it to the supplicant, and, with a kindly
mind and gentle speech, he tells him, “I now give my entire body
to you. You may take out my tongue and use it however you wish
so that you can fulfill all your aspirations.” Then the bodhisattva
dedicates all his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the tongue that reaches everywhere with
which they are able to expound the Dharma in all languages;
May all beings acquire the tongue that can cover the face381 with
which they do not have two ways of speaking and are truthful
in everything they say;
May all beings acquire the tongue that everywhere covers all bud­
dha lands with which they manifest the masterful spiritual
superknowledges of the buddhas;
May all beings acquire the soft and broad tongue with which they
always enjoy exquisitely marvelous, pure, and supreme flavors;
May all beings acquire an eloquent tongue with which they are
able to cut through the net of doubts of those in the world;
May all beings acquire the luminous tongue which is able to ema­
nate numberless myriads of koṭīs of light rays;
May all beings acquire the decisive tongue with which they speak
with endless eloquence on all dharmas;
May all beings acquire the thoroughly trained tongue with which
they are well able to reveal and explain all essential esoteric
matters and enable everyone to believe everything they say;
May all beings acquire the universally comprehending tongue
with which they skillfully enter the great ocean of all lan­
guages; and

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
677
May all beings acquire the tongue with which they can skillfully
speak about all Dharma gateways and attain perfection in the
knowledge of all languages.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his tongue. He makes these dedications to
enable all beings to attain perfect fulfillment of the unimpeded
knowledges.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing to
give his head to those who come seeking it, doing so in the same
way as did all the great bodhisattvas such as Supreme Knowledge
Bodhisattva and that great man, King Kāśi. The giving that he does
is done:
Because he wishes to develop a head with supreme wisdom that
penetrates all dharmas;
Because he wishes to develop a head that realizes great bodhi and
rescues beings;
Because he wishes to have a head that is foremost in its perception
of all dharmas;
To acquire a head possessed of right views and pure wisdom;
Because he wishes to develop a head that is not obstructed by any­
thing;
Because he wishes to acquire a head that realizes the foremost of
all grounds;
Because he seeks a head with the world’s most supreme wisdom;
Because he wishes to develop the summit mark invisible to every­
one in the three realms together with a head possessed of pure
wisdom;
In order to acquire the head that appears as the king of wisdom
everywhere throughout the ten directions; and
Because he wishes to acquire the head with such sovereign mas­
tery in fulfilling all dharmas that no one can damage it.
Sons of the Buddha, if a bodhisattva-mahāsattva is securely estab­
lished in this dharma, cultivating it with energetic diligence, then
he is one who has already entered the lineage of all buddhas. As
he trains in the buddhas’ practice of giving, he develops pure faith
in all buddhas and increases the growth of his roots of goodness.
He enables all supplicants who come to him to then gain joyous
satisfaction. His mind is purified and experiences measureless
celebratory delight. With his purity of mind and resolute faith, he
clearly illuminates the Dharma of the Buddha, arouses the resolve
to attain bodhi, and securely establishes himself in the mind of
relinquishing. All his faculties experience blissful delight in this,

678

The Flower Adornment Sutra
his meritorious qualities increase, and he develops a wholesome
aspiration with which he always delights in cultivating the practice
of vast giving.
The bodhisattva then dedicates all his roots of goodness in these
ways: “May all beings acquire the head of a tathāgata with the invis­
ible summit mark that no one anywhere can outshine, the head that
is foremost in all buddha kṣetras, the perfectly developed head of a
buddha so rarely found in the world, one in which the hairs grow in
rightward spirals, with pristine radiance, moist and glossy, adorned
with svastikas, the head possessed of wisdom, the head that is fore­
most in all worlds, the perfectly developed head, the pure head, the
head of he who sits at the site of enlightenment with perfectly ful­
filled wisdom.” These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications
of roots of goodness when giving his head. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable beings to acquire the most supreme Dharma and
develop unexcelled great wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing to
give his hands and feet to beings, doing so in the same way as did
Always Vigorous Bodhisattva, Sorrowless King Bodhisattva, and
countless other bodhisattvas such as these who, in all kinds of dif­
ferent places of rebirth in all the rebirth destinies, gave their hands
and feet and used faith as their hands as they engaged in beneficial
actions. Going forth and returning again, he reaches everywhere,
diligently cultivating right Dharma, wishing to acquire jewel-
bestowing hands. In giving his hands, his practice is not done in
vain. In fulfilling the bodhisattva path, he always extends his hands
with the intention of bestowing vast kindness. Walking slowly, he
travels along, courageous and fearless, reliant on the power of pure
faith, fulfilling the practice of vigor as he puts an end to the path of
bad actions and progresses toward the realization of bodhi.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva engages
in such giving, with a measurelessly and boundlessly vast mind, he
opens the gates of pure Dharma, enters the ocean of all buddhas,
and perfects the hand of giving, everywhere providing for those
throughout the ten directions. The power of his vows sustain him
on the path to all-knowledge. He abides in the ultimately immac­
ulate mind and in the endlessly indestructible Dharma body and
wisdom body. None of the works of the māras are able to move him
even slightly. Relying on the good spiritual guide, he strengthens
his resolve and, together with the bodhisattvas, he cultivates the
perfection of giving.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
679
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva seeks all-
knowledge for the sake of all beings. When giving his hands and
feet, he dedicates his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings perfect the power of the spiritual superknowledges
and acquire the jewel-producing hands;
Having acquired jewel-producing hands, may they honor and
revere each other, conceive of each other as fields of merit, and
make offerings to each other of the various kinds of jewels;
May they make offerings to buddhas of the many kinds of jewels;
May they produce clouds of marvelous jewels that stretch every­
where throughout all buddha lands;
May they enable all beings to have thoughts of mutual compas­
sion and refrain from tormenting or injuring each other;
May they travel to all buddha kṣetras, secure in fearlessness;
May they naturally possess the ultimate spiritual superknowledges;
May they also be able to acquire jewel-bestowing hands, flower-
bestowing hands, incense-bestowing hands, robe-bestowing
hands, canopy-bestowing hands, flower garland bestow­
ing hands, powdered incense bestowing hands, adornment-
bestowing hands, boundlessly bestowing hands, measurelessly
bestowing hands, and universally bestowing hands;
Having acquired these hands, may they use the powers of the
spiritual superknowledges to be ever diligent in going to visit
all buddha lands;
May they be able touch all buddha worlds everywhere with one
hand;
May they use the hands of sovereign mastery to support all beings;
May they acquire the hands with marvelous signs which emanate
measureless light;
May they be able with just one hand to everywhere shelter all
beings; and
May they develop the signs of the Tathāgata’s fingers with proxi­
mal webs and copper-like fingernails.
Then, using the hands of great vows to everywhere shelter all beings,
the bodhisattva wishes: “May all beings resolve to always delight in
seeking unexcelled bodhi, may they produce a great ocean of all
kinds of meritorious qualities, may they feel happy whenever they
see supplicants approaching them and never tire of seeing them,
may they enter the ocean of the Buddha’s Dharma, and may they
develop roots of goodness identical to those of a buddha.” These
are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of goodness
when giving hands and feet.

680

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing to
pierce his body and draw out his own blood to give it to other beings,
doing so in the same way as did Dharma Karma Bodhisattva, King
of Good Intentions Bodhisattva, and countless other bodhisattvas
such as these. When, in all the rebirth destinies, he gives the blood
from his own bodies: He arouses the mind intent on the realization
of all-knowledge; he arouses the mind that delights in and looks
with admiration on great bodhi; he arouses the mind that delights
in cultivation of the bodhisattva practices; he arouses the mind
that does not seize on painful feelings; he arouses the mind that
delights in encountering supplicants; he arouses the mind that does
not resent those who come as supplicants; he arouses the mind that
progresses along the path of all bodhisattvas; he arouses the mind
that preserves the relinquishing practiced by all bodhisattvas; he
arouses the mind that broadens the bodhisattva’s wholesome giv­
ing; and he arouses the mind of irreversible resolve, the mind that
never rests, and the mind that is free of attachment to self. He then
dedicates all his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings be able to acquire the Dharma body and wisdom
body;
May all beings be able to acquire the body as tireless as vajra;
May all beings acquire the indestructible body no one can injure;
May all beings acquire bodies like the transformation bodies that
endlessly appear everywhere in the world;
May all beings acquire a delightful body that is sublimely pure
and solid;
May all beings acquire a body born of the Dharma realm that, like
that of a tathāgata, does not depend on anything;
May all beings acquire a body as luminous as marvelous jewels
that no one in the world can outshine;
May all beings acquire a wisdom-treasury body that has sover­
eign mastery in the realm of the deathless;
May all beings acquire an ocean-of-jewels body that all beings
benefit from seeing, never seeing it in vain; and
May all beings acquire an empty space body that none of the
world’s torments and troubles are able to stain.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving blood from his own body, doing so with the
Great Vehicle mind, the pure mind, the vast mind, the blissfully
pleased mind, the joyous mind, the delighted mind, the especially
superior mind, the happy mind, and the mind that is free of turbid­
ity.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
681
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva sees that
a supplicant has come seeking to acquire the marrow and flesh of
his body, he feels joyous delight and speaks to that supplicant with
gentle words: “Take my body’s marrow and flesh and use it however
you wish,” giving them away in the same way as did Abundantly
Beneficial Bodhisattva, King of Complete Giving Bodhisattva, and
countless other bodhisattvas such as these.
When he gives away his own marrow and flesh wherever he is
reborn in all the destinies of rebirth:
His joy becomes vast and his motivation to give increases;
He cultivates roots of goodness identical to those of the bodhisat­
tvas;
He abandons the world’s defilements and develops deep aspira­
tions;
His resolve to use his body in universal giving becomes endless;
He produces measureless vast roots of goodness;
He gathers the jewels of all the marvelous meritorious qualities;
He is tireless in taking on practices accordant with the Dharma of
the bodhisattvas;
His mind always feels fondness for the meritorious qualities of
giving;
In giving everything to everyone, his mind is free of any regrets;
He deeply contemplates all dharmas as arising from conditions
and as devoid of any essential substance;
He does not covet the karma of giving or the karmic rewards of
that karma; and
He gives impartially to whomever he meets.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva practices
giving in ways such as these:
All buddhas appear before him because he thinks of them as
fathers and receives their protective mindfulness;
All beings appear directly before him because he enables them to
securely abide in the pure Dharma;
All worlds appear directly before him because he purifies all bud­
dha lands;
All beings appear directly before him because, with the mind of
great compassion, he rescues and protects them all;
All buddhas’ paths appear directly before him because he delights
in contemplating the ten powers of the Tathāgata;
All bodhisattvas of the past, future, and present appear directly
before him because he joins in fulfilling all the same roots of
goodness;

682

The Flower Adornment Sutra
All of the fearlessnesses appear directly before him because he is
capable of roaring the roar of the most supreme of all lions;
All three periods of time appear directly before him because he
has acquired the knowledge of equality with which he contem­
plates them all;
All worlds appear directly before him because he has made the
vast vow to cultivate bodhi to the very end of all future kalpas;
and
All bodhisattvas’ tireless practices appear directly before him
because he has aroused the measurelessly vast resolve.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his
marrow and flesh, he dedicates his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the indestructible vajra body;
May all beings acquire the solid body which never diminishes;
May all beings acquire the mind-generated body as adorned and
pure as the Buddha’s body;
May all beings acquire the body with the signs of the hundredfold
merit and adorn themselves with the thirty-two marks;
May all beings acquire the marvelously adorned body with the
eighty secondary characteristics and become fully possessed of
the ten indestructible powers;
May all beings acquire the ultimately pure and illimitable body
of a tathāgata;
May all beings acquire the solidly enduring body which cannot be
damaged by any of māras or adversaries;
May all beings acquire the body with but a single sign, the sign
of the single body that is the same as that of all buddhas of the
three periods of time;382
May all beings acquire the unimpeded body and pervade the
realms of empty space with the pure Dharma body; and
May all beings acquire the bodhi treasury body that is able to con­
tain all worlds everywhere.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when, as he seeks all-knowledge, he gives his marrow and
flesh. He makes these dedications to enable all beings to acquire the
ultimately pure and measureless body of a tathāgata.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing to
give his heart to those who come and seek to acquire it, doing so
in the same way as did Free of Regrets or Weariness Bodhisattva,
Unimpeded King Bodhisattva, and countless other bodhisattvas
such as these. When he gives his own heart to a supplicant: He

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
683
trains in the freely giving mind, cultivates the mind of total giv­
ing, practices the mind of dāna pāramitā, perfects the mind of dāna
pāramitā, and trains in all bodhisattvas’ mind of giving, in the mind
that endlessly relinquishes everything, in the mind accustomed to
giving everything, in the mind that takes up the burden of all bod­
hisattvas’ practice of giving, in the mind that abides in right mind­
fulness of all buddhas as appearing directly before him, and in the
mind that endlessly makes offerings to all who come as supplicants.
When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva practices giving in this way, his
mind abides in purity to liberate all beings, to reach the station of
bodhi with the ten powers, to cultivate in reliance on great vows,
because he wishes to become established in the bodhisattva path,
because he wishes to realize all-knowledge, and to refrain from
abandoning his original vows. He dedicates his roots of goodness
in these ways:383
May all beings acquire hearts like a vajra treasury invulnerable
to ruin even by all the vajra ring mountains, and other such
things;
May all beings acquire hearts of the vajra realm signified by the
mark of the svastika;
May they acquire hearts that cannot be shaken by anyone;
May they acquire hearts that cannot become fearful;
May they acquire hearts that always and endlessly benefit the
world;
May they acquire hearts bearing the banner of great courage and
a treasury of wisdom;
May they acquire hearts as steadfast as that signified by the ban­
ner of a nārāyaṇa;
May they acquire hearts as inexhaustible as the ocean of all beings;
May they acquire hearts as indestructible as a nārāyaṇa-garbha;384
May they acquire hearts that demolish all the works of Māra and
the hordes of Māra’s armies;
May they acquire fearless hearts;
May they acquire hearts of great awesome virtue;
May they acquire ever vigorous hearts;
May they acquire greatly courageous hearts;
May they acquire hearts that are never terrified;
May they acquire hearts that don the vajra armor;
May they acquire the supreme hearts of the bodhisattvas;
May they acquire hearts that achieve success in the Buddha’s
Dharma and emanate the light of bodhi;

684

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May they acquire hearts that sit beneath the bodhi tree, establish
themselves in the right Dharma of all buddhas, abandon all
delusions, and attain all-knowledge; and
May they acquire hearts that perfect the ten powers.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his heart. He makes these dedications to
enable beings to be undefiled by the world and possess a tathāgata’s
heart of the ten powers.
Sons of the Buddha, if someone comes to the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva seeking to acquire his intestines, kidneys, liver, or
lungs, he is willing to give them all to him, doing so in the same way
as did Wholesome Giving Bodhisattva, Māra-Subduing Sovereign
Bodhisattva, and countless other great bodhisattvas such as these.
When practicing such giving, he is delighted to see a supplicant
coming and looks on him lovingly. In the quest to realize bodhi,
whatever the supplicant needs, he gives it all to him with a mind
free of regrets. He regards his body as devoid of any durability
and thinks, “I should give this body to him and instead acquire a
durable body.” He also reflects that this body will soon decay and
become repulsive to look at, fit only to be eaten by foxes, wolves, or
hungry dogs. He realizes that this body is impermanent and real­
izes that one is bound to have to give it up to be eaten by others after
it loses consciousness.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva engages
in this contemplation, he realizes that the body is impermanent and
extremely filthy. Having awakened to this dharma, he feels great
joy and then respectfully and attentively looks upon that supplicant
who has come to him, regarding him as like a good spiritual guide
who has come intending to protect him. He then gives with kind­
ness whatever the supplicant seeks and thus trades this unstable
body for a body that is durable.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives in
this way, he dedicates all his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the body that is a treasury of wisdom
which is both inwardly and outwardly pure;
May all beings acquire the body that is a treasury of merit and be
able to sustain and preserve the vow to attain all-knowledge;
May all beings acquire the supremely marvelous body that
inwardly contains marvelous fragrances and outwardly ema­
nates light;
May all beings acquire a body with an abdomen that is not appar­
ent, that is well-formed and straight above and below, and that
has proportionate limbs;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
685
May all beings acquire the wisdom body pleased and developed
by the flavors of the Buddha’s Dharma;
May all beings acquire the inexhaustible body with which they
cultivate and become established in the extremely profound
nature of dharmas;
May all beings acquire the body that is a pure repository of
dhāraṇīs with which they reveal and explain all dharmas with
marvelous eloquence;
May all beings acquire the body that is pure and become inwardly
and outwardly pure in both body and mind;
May all beings acquire the body possessed of a tathāgata’s wisdom
and deep contemplative practices with which they become full
of wisdom and rain down the great Dharma rain; and
May all beings acquire the body that, while inwardly quiescent,
outwardly serves beings as a king of wisdom banners that ema­
nates great light which illuminates everything everywhere.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his intestines, kidneys, liver, and lungs. He
makes these dedications to enable all beings to attain inward and
outward purity and become established in unimpeded wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing
to bestow on supplicants his limbs, joints, and bones, doing so in
the same way as did Dharma Treasury Bodhisattva, Light King
Bodhisattva, and countless other great bodhisattvas. When practic­
ing the giving of his limbs, joints, and bones, whenever he sees a
supplicant coming, he gives rise to thoughts of affection, thoughts
of joy, thoughts of pure faith, thoughts of happiness, courageous
thoughts, kindly thoughts, unimpeded thoughts, pure thoughts,
and thoughts wishing to give whatever is sought.
When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives away his body’s bones,
he dedicates his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire a body that is as if transformationally pro­
duced and thus never again receive a body of bones, flesh, and
blood;
May all beings acquire an indestructible and invincible vajra body;
May all beings acquire the omniscient and perfect Dharma body
born into a realm free of bonds, free of attachments, and free of
fetters;
May all beings acquire the interminable and indestructible body
possessed of the power of wisdom and perfectly fulfilled facul­
ties;

686

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings acquire a body in which they possess the power
of Dharma, gain sovereign mastery of the wisdom powers, and
reach the far shore;
May all beings acquire a solidly enduring body in which, as a per­
son of integrity, it never decays;
May all beings acquire a body with which they are able to adapt to
whatever is fitting as they teach and train all beings;
May all beings acquire a body imbued with wisdom and possess
the great strength of a nārāyaṇa’s limbs;
May all beings acquire a solid and interminably enduring body
forever free of exhaustion or weariness;
May all beings acquire an immensely powerful and securely abid­
ing body in which they possess the great power of vigor;
May all beings acquire the Dharma body that equally pervades
the entire world and dwell in the measureless station of the
most supreme wisdom;
May all beings acquire a body with such power of merit that it
enables all who see it to benefit and abandon the many kinds
of evil;
May all beings acquire a body that has no place it depends on and
become able to possess wisdom that is free of attachments;
May all beings acquire a body that is drawn forth by the Buddha
and always receives the supportive protection of all buddhas;
May all beings acquire a body with which they everywhere ben­
efit all beings and are able to everywhere enter into all the paths
[of rebirth];
May all beings acquire a body which appears everywhere and
which is everywhere able to illuminate all dharmas of the
Buddha;
May all beings acquire an abundantly vigorous body with which
they are single-mindedly diligent in cultivating the Great
Vehicle’s wisdom practices;
May all beings acquire a pure body in which they abandon pride
and arrogance with ever-abiding and unshakable wisdom;
May all beings acquire a body with which they are steadfast in
practice and accomplish the Great Vehicle’s actions leading to
all-knowledge; and
May all beings acquire a body abiding in the family of the bud­
dhas and forever leave behind all worldly births and deaths.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his body’s bones. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable beings to attain all-knowledge and become forever
pure.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
687
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva sees
someone coming, sharp knife in hand, who then begs to be given
the skin of his body, his mind is then filled with joyous delight
and all his faculties are suffused with bliss. It is as if someone had
graciously bestowed on him some extreme kindness. He then wel­
comes him in, arranges a seat for him, allows him to sit down, bends
his body low in reverential respect, and then reflects, “A supplicant
such as this is rarely ever encountered. This is one who, wishing to
fulfill my vow to attain all-knowledge, has deliberately come here
seeking to acquire this in order to benefit me.”
Then, with joyous delight and kindly countenance, he addresses
him, saying, “I now relinquish this entire body so that, however
much of my skin you may need, you may feel free to take it for your
own use.” In so doing, he is like Treasury of Purity Bodhisattva,
Golden Flanks Deer King Bodhisattva, and countless other great
bodhisattvas from the past such as these, the same and no different.
Then the bodhisattva dedicates all his roots of goodness in these
ways:
May all beings acquire fine skin like that of a tathāgata that is so
pure in its color and appearance that whoever sees it never
grows tired of looking at it;
May all beings acquire skin that cannot be damaged and that is as
indestructible as vajra;
May all beings acquire gold-colored skin like the supremely mar­
velous real jambūnada gold in its immaculate and radiant purity;
May all beings acquire the skin possessed of countless hues that
displays whichever pure color one thinks of as pleasing;
May all beings acquire pure and marvelously colored skin, the
śrāmaṇa’s goodness, gentleness, and purity, and the Tathāgata’s
physical marks;
May all beings acquire skin with the foremost coloration, an
inherently pure nature, and the incomparable physical marks;
May all beings develop the Tathāgata’s pure-colored skin and
adorn themselves with all the major marks and secondary char­
acteristics;
May all beings acquire marvelously colored skin and emanate
great light which everywhere illuminates all things;
May all beings acquire skin like a net of light which, like the
world’s lofty banners, emanates an ineffable number of light
spheres; and
May all beings acquire lustrous colored skin and all the physical
marks, all of which are pure.

688

The Flower Adornment Sutra
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his skin. He makes these dedications to
enable beings to acquire buddha kṣetras in which everything is
purified and possess the great meritorious qualities of a tathāgata.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing to
give his fingers and toes to supplicants who come to him, doing so
in the same way as did Solid Vigor Bodhisattva, Sovereign King of
Jambudvīpa Bodhisattva, and countless other such great bodhisat­
tvas.
At that time, the bodhisattva maintains a congenial demeanor.
With his mind established in goodness and free of inverted views,
he abides in the Great Vehicle, not seeking to fulfill some exquisite
desire and not valuing fame. Rather, he arouses only the vast inten­
tions of the bodhisattva and abandons the defilements of miser­
liness and jealousy as he single-mindedly progresses toward the
Tathāgata’s unsurpassable and sublime Dharma.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva gives in this manner,
he gathers together these roots of goodness and dedicates them in
these ways:
May all beings acquire long and slender fingers no different than
those of a buddha;
May all beings acquire full and round fingers that, from root to
tip, have an even profile;
May all beings acquire the copper-red bulging fingernails that are
immaculate, and shining;
May all beings acquire the fingers of the omniscient supreme man
and be able to absorb and retain all dharmas;
May all beings acquire the fingers of the secondary signs and
become fully possessed of the ten powers;
May all beings acquire the fingers of the great man that are slen­
der, full, and even;
May all beings acquire fingers with wheel signs and round and
full finger joints in which the lines spiral in a rightward direc­
tion;
May all beings acquire fingers like lotuses with swirling svastika
patterns, the karmic reward of the ten powers, and the adorn­
ments of the major marks and secondary signs;
May all beings acquire fingers which are repositories of light that
emanate great radiance which illuminates an ineffable number
of buddha worlds; and
May all beings acquire well-proportioned and well-distributed
fingers complete with the proximal webs.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
689
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving his fingers and toes. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable all beings to attain purity of mind.
Sons of the Buddha, if, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is
requesting the teaching of the Dharma, some person says to him, “If
you are able to give me your fingernails and their adjoining flesh,
I will give you the Dharma,” the bodhisattva responds by saying,
“If you merely give me this Dharma, you may take my fingernails
and their adjoining flesh to use however you wish.” In so doing,
he acts just like Sovereign Dharma-Seeking King Bodhisattva,
Inexhaustible Bodhisattva, and countless other great bodhisattvas
who were willing to sacrifice even their own fingernails and adjoin­
ing flesh to supplicants as they sought the Dharma they wished
to use in explaining and expounding on right Dharma to benefit
beings and fully satisfy them. The bodhisattva then dedicates all
these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire all buddhas’ sign of the copper-red nails;
May all beings acquire lustrous nails and the adornments of the
secondary signs;
May all beings acquire the immaculate shining nails that are fore­
most in their bright reflections;
May all beings acquire the nails of the omniscient ones and pos­
sess the marks of the great men;
May all beings acquire the incomparable nails and have no defil­
ing attachments to the world;
May all beings acquire the marvelously adorned nails, the light
from which everywhere illuminates all worlds;
May all beings acquire the indestructible nails that are immacu­
lately clean and free of any defects;
May all beings acquire the nails that are signs of having pene­
trated all the skillful means of the Buddha’s Dharma and may
they possess their vast and thoroughly pure wisdom;
May all beings acquire the nails born of goodness and the karmic
fruits of bodhisattvas of which none are not pure and marvel­
ous; and
May all beings acquire the nails of the omniscient Great Guide
that emanate a treasury of marvelous light of countless colors.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when, because he seeks the Dharma, he gives his fin­
gernails with their adjoining flesh. He makes these dedications to
enable beings to have the fingernails that are [signs of] possessing
the all-knowledge and unimpeded powers of all buddhas.

690

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, as the bodhisattva-mahāsattva searches
for the treasury of the Buddha’s Dharma, he reveres and honors it
and conceives of it as only rarely encountered. If someone able to
explain it were to come along and say, “If you are able to cast your
body into a fire pit that is seven fathoms deep, I shall give you the
Dharma,” having heard that, the bodhisattva would be filled with
exultation and reflect in this way: “For the sake of acquiring the
Dharma, I would even be able to abide for a long time in the Avīci
Hells and in all the wretched destinies, undergoing countless suf­
ferings, how much the more so might I be willing to plunge into
a fire pit within the human realm in order to immediately gain a
hearing of the Dharma. How very marvelous that right Dharma
might be so easily acquired that I need not undergo countless cruel
torments in the hells, but rather need only enter a fire pit to be able
to hear it spoken. If you will but speak it for me, I will plunge into
this pit of fire.” In so doing, he is like the King, Seeker of Good
Dharma Bodhisattva, and Vajra Contemplation Bodhisattva who
entered pits of fire because they sought the Dharma. Then the bod­
hisattva dedicates these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings dwell where the Buddha dwells, in the dharma of
all-knowledge, and may they never retreat from their path to
unexcelled bodhi;
May all beings abandon all hazardous difficulties and enjoy the
happiness of the Buddha;
May all beings acquire the fearless mind and be free of all terror;
May all beings forever delight in seeking the Dharma, possess joy­
ous delight, and become adorned with the many dharmas;
May all beings abandon all the wretched rebirth destinies and
extinguish all the blazing fires of the three poisons;
May all beings always gain happiness and possess the supremely
sublime bliss of the Tathāgata;
May all beings acquire the bodhisattva’s resolve and forever
escape all the fires of greed, hatred, and delusion;
May all beings acquire the bliss of all the bodhisattva samādhis,
see the buddhas everywhere, and have minds filled with joy;
May all beings skillfully teach right Dharma, reach the ultimate
understanding of Dharma, and never forget it; and
May all beings possess the bodhisattva’s spiritual superknowl­
edges and marvelous bliss and ultimately abide in the knowl­
edge of all modes.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of good­
ness when about to plunge into a pit of fire to seek right Dharma. He

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
691
makes these dedications to enable beings to leave behind obstruc­
tive karma and gain the fire of wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, in his quest for right Dharma, when the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva analyzes, expounds on, and opens up the
bodhisattva path, reveals the path to bodhi, progresses toward
unexcelled wisdom, diligently cultivates the ten powers, broad­
ens his resolve to attain all-knowledge, obtains the dharmas of the
unimpeded knowledges, enables beings to attain purity, dwells in
the bodhisattva’s sphere of action, diligently cultivates great wis­
dom, and guards the bodhi of the buddhas, he fully undergoes
countless sufferings and torments, doing so in the same way as did
Seeking Good Dharma Bodhisattva, Courageous King Bodhisattva,
and countless other great bodhisattvas. In his quest to acquire the
Dharma, he undergoes measureless suffering and even goes so far
as to take in the most extremely and immensely evil people who,
as slanderers of right Dharma, are blanketed in bad karma and
possessed by the deeds of Māra. Because he seeks right Dharma,
he takes on all the suffering and torments that they should rightly
have to undergo. He then dedicates all his roots of goodness in
these ways:
May all beings forever abandon all oppression by suffering and
torments and may they gain the happiness and sovereign mas­
tery of the spiritual superknowledges;
May all beings forever abandon all sufferings and attain every
kind of happiness;
May all beings forever extinguish the mass of sufferings and
acquire the illuminated body in which they forever enjoy hap­
piness;
May all beings escape the prison of suffering and perfect the wis­
dom practices;
May all beings come to see the path of peace and security and
abandon all the wretched rebirth destinies;
May all beings acquire the bliss of Dharma joy and forever cut off
the many kinds of suffering;
May all beings forever extricate themselves from the many kinds
of suffering, treat each other with loving kindness, and remain
free of harmful motivations;
May all beings acquire the bliss of all buddhas and leave behind
the sufferings of saṃsāra;
May all beings gain pure and incomparable happiness in which
none of the sufferings and torments can harm them; and
May all beings acquire every form of supreme bliss and gain the
ultimate and unimpeded happiness of the Buddha.

692

The Flower Adornment Sutra
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when, in his quest to acquire the Dharma, he undergoes
the many kinds of suffering. He makes these dedications wishing
to rescue and protect all beings, enable them to abandon the haz­
ardous difficulties, dwell in all-knowledge, and reach the station of
liberation free of all obstacles.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is serv­
ing as a king who seeks right Dharma, he conceives of its every
text, every word, every sentence, and every meaning as so rarely
encountered that, in order to acquire it, he would even be willing
to completely relinquish everything in all the lands bordered by
the oceans, whether near or far, including the states, the cities, the
outlying districts, his peoples, the treasuries, the parks, ponds,
buildings, forests, flowers, fruit, and so forth, including even all the
precious, exotic, and marvelous things, the palaces, the towers, his
wife, children, retinue, and even his position as king.
He would be willing to relinquish it all in order to acquire the
Dharma which is durable from the midst of everything else which
is transient, wishing to benefit all beings by diligently seeking the
unimpeded liberation and ultimate purity of all buddhas’ path to
all-knowledge, doing so in the same way as did Immensely Strong
Virtue Bodhisattva, King of Supreme Virtue Bodhisattva, and
countless other such great bodhisattvas.
He seeks so diligently for even the smallest amount of right
Dharma that, for the sake of but a single word, he bows down in
reverence. He abides in right mindfulness of the Dharma of all
buddhas of the three periods of time, delights in cultivating it, and
always refrains from covetous attachment to fame or offerings. He
is willing to relinquish his position as a sovereign king of the entire
world to seek the Buddha’s position as the sovereign king of the
Dharma. His mind is free of attachment to any worldly pleasures.
It is with world-transcending Dharma that he nourishes his mind.
He forever abandons all the conceptual proliferation of the world
and abides within the Dharma of the buddhas that is free of all
such conceptual proliferation. The bodhisattva then dedicates all
his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings always so delight in kindly giving that they are
willing to relinquish everything;
May all beings be able to relinquish everything with minds that
are free of regret for having done so;
May all beings always seek right Dharma and never begrudge the
sacrifice of even their own bodies, lives, or necessities of life in
seeking to obtain it;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
693
May all beings acquire all the benefits of the Dharma and be able
to cut off the doubts of all beings;
May all beings acquire the desire for wholesome dharmas and
have minds that always rejoice in the right Dharma of all bud­
dhas;
May all beings be able to relinquish even their own bodies and
lives or the royal throne in seeking the Dharma of the Buddha
while also cultivating unsurpassable bodhi with great resolve;
May all beings reverently esteem right Dharma, always deeply
delight in it, and never begrudge even their bodies or lives [to
preserve it];
May all beings guard and preserve the extremely rare Dharma of
the buddhas and always diligently cultivate it;
May all beings acquire the light of all buddhas’ bodhi and accom­
plish the bodhi practices without having to rely on others to
become awakened; and
May all beings always be able to contemplate all dharmas of the
Buddha, extricate the arrows of their doubts, and have minds
that attain peace and security.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when relinquishing even his country and its cities in
his quest for right Dharma. He makes these dedications to enable
beings to acquire perfectly complete knowledge and vision and to
enable them to always succeed in dwelling in the path to peace and
security.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva serves
as the king of a great country who has sovereign authority in the
law, he everywhere implements the teaching’s decrees by ordering
that livelihoods involving killing be done away with. Within the
borders of the continent of Jambudvīpa, in all its cities, outlying dis­
tricts, and villages, all slaughtering of animals is entirely forbidden
and brought to a halt. He thus everywhere bestows fearlessness and
freedom from others’ aggressive intentions on all the many differ­
ent kinds of living beings, whether they be those without legs, with
two legs, with four legs, or with many legs.
He promotes the extensive cultivation of all the bodhisattva
practices so that humane and kindly treatment extends even to
creatures and people no longer assail or torment others, but rather
bring forth the wonderful and precious resolve to ensure the peace
and security of beings. He forms a deep-seated aspiration to follow
all buddhas and always abide in the three kinds of pure moral pre­
cepts385 while also causing beings to abide in them as well.

694

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva causes all beings to abide in the
five moral precepts and forever cut off all killing karma and then
dedicates these resulting roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings resolve to attain bodhi, acquire wisdom, and for­
ever ensure endless life;
May all beings live for countless kalpas, making offerings to all
buddhas and respectfully and diligently cultivating [the path],
thereby increasing their life spans even more;
May all beings fully cultivate the Dharma for transcending aging
and death so that no disasters or poisons can harm their lives;
May all beings fully perfect the body that remains unafflicted
by illness in which they have sovereign mastery over their life
span and are able to live as long as they wish;
May all beings acquire an endless life span that exhausts the
bounds of all future kalpas during which they abide in the bod­
hisattva practices, teaching and training all beings;
May all beings become gateways to long life in which the roots of
goodness leading to the ten powers grow;
May all beings acquire fully developed roots of goodness, attain
endless life, and fulfill the great vows;
May all beings see all buddhas, make offerings to them, serve
them, and live endlessly long lives in which they cultivate and
accumulate roots of goodness;
May all beings train well in the trainings wherever the tathāgatas
dwell, gain the joy of the ārya dharmas, and acquire endlessly
long life; and
May all beings acquire the ever-abiding life faculty free of aging
or illness and penetrate the wisdom of the buddha with cour­
age and vigor.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from dwelling in the three collections of pure moral pre­
cepts and forever putting an end to killing karma. He makes these
dedications to enable beings to acquire the perfectly full wisdom of
the Buddha’s ten powers.
Sons of the Buddha, whenever the bodhisattva-mahāsattva
sees that there is a being whose mind harbors such cruelty that
he subjects humans and animals to castration, causes their bod­
ies to become deficient in this way, and thus subjects them to all
manner of intense suffering, having seen these circumstances, he
arouses great kindness and compassion, and, moved by pity, res­
cues them from this and then orders that all people throughout all
of Jambudvīpa shall henceforth abandon this kind of livelihood.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
695
At that time, the bodhisattva tells that man, “Why are you com­
mitting these evil deeds? I have storehouses completely full of hun­
dreds of thousands of myriads of koṭīs of every kind of pleasing
thing. I am willing to provide you with all of them you feel you
need. What you have been doing will be the source of your hav­
ing to suffer a multitude of punishments. I am now remonstrating
with you: You must no longer do these things. This work that you
pursue is unprincipled. Even supposing that you might have some­
thing you gain from it, what possible use could that be to you? That
you might be able to benefit yourself through the injury of others is
something that could never be possible. All tathāgatas do not praise
the unwholesome dharmas involved in evil actions such as these.”
Having said this, he then gives him all those pleasing things
and also uses fine words to explain the wondrous Dharma for him,
thereby causing him to feel pleased, that is, he reveals the dharma
of quiescence and causes him to believe and accept it and thence­
forth extinguish whatever is bad, cultivate pure karma, arouse the
mind of kindness toward others, and no longer harm other beings.
After hearing this, that man forever abandons the evil of karmic
transgressions. The bodhisattva then dedicates these roots of good­
ness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the form of a great man and develop the
Tathāgata’s mark of the stallion’s genital ensheathment;
May all beings acquire the male form, arouse courageous resolve,
and cultivate every kind of brahmacārya;
May all beings acquire the power of courage, constantly serve as a
guide, abide in unimpeded wisdom, and never retreat;
May all beings acquire the body of the great man, forever abandon
thoughts of desire, and remain free of any defiling attachment;
May all beings be able to perfect the dharmas of a son of good
family, increase in wisdom, and be praised by all buddhas;
May all beings possess the powers of the great man and always be
able to cultivate the roots of goodness leading to the ten powers;
May all beings never be physically emasculated and always culti­
vate merit and wisdom and the unprecedented dharmas;386
May all beings become free of attachments or bondage in the
five types of desires and may they gain liberation of mind,
renounce the three realms of existence, and abide in the bod­
hisattva practices;
May all beings become great men who are foremost in wisdom,
who are revered and trusted by everyone, and who inspire
everyone to defer to and follow their transformative teaching;
and

696

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings possess the wisdom of the bodhisattva who is a
great man and who before long is bound to become an unex­
celled great hero.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from prohibiting and eliminating all male castration. He
makes these dedications to enable beings: to possess the physical
form of a great man; to protect all good and great men; to be born
into the family of worthies and āryas; to become fully endowed
with wisdom; to always diligently cultivate the supreme practices
of great men; to have the capacities of great men; to skillfully reveal
the sevenfold path of great men;387 and to possess all buddhas’ lin­
eage of virtuous great men, right teaching of great men, courage of
great men, vigor of great men, wisdom of great men, and purity of
great men, everywhere enabling beings to attain all of these to the
most ultimate degree.
Sons of the Buddha, if a bodhisattva-mahāsattva sees that a
tathāgata has come forth into the world to proclaim right Dharma,
he then everywhere announces this to everyone in a loud voice, say­
ing, “A tathāgata has come into the world! A tathāgata has come into
the world!” Thus he enables all beings to hear the Buddha’s name
and abandon all arrogance and conceptual speculation. He then
also exhorts and guides them, thereby enabling them to quickly
go and see the Buddha, enabling them to become mindful of the
Buddha, enabling them to take refuge in the Buddha, enabling them
to focus on the Buddha’s presence, enabling them to contemplate
the Buddha, and enabling them to praise the Buddha.
He also extensively explains for them that it is rare to ever
encounter a buddha and that a buddha may appear only once in
a thousand myriads of koṭīs of kalpas. Because of this, when those
beings are able to see the Buddha, they arouse pure faith in him,
feel exultantly happy, and then revere him and make offerings to
him. Also, from this one buddha, they hear the names of other bud­
dhas, and then in turn go to meet countless buddhas with whom
they plant roots of goodness which they then cultivate and thereby
cause to grow.
Then, due to having seen the Buddha, numberless hundreds
of thousands of myriads of koṭīs of nayutas of beings become puri­
fied and receive the most ultimate training. Those beings then all
come to conceive of that bodhisattva as the most superior of good
spiritual guides. It is because of that bodhisattva that they perfect
[their cultivation of] the Dharma of the Buddha. Then, due to roots
of goodness planted throughout numberless kalpas, they do the
Buddha’s works throughout the world.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
697
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva teaches
beings and enables them to see the Buddha, he dedicates his roots
of goodness in these ways:
May all beings go of their own accord to see the Buddha without
waiting to be urged to do so, proceeding then to serve them,
make offerings to them, and delight them;
May all beings always delight in seeing the Buddha and may their
motivation to do so never diminish;
May all beings always diligently cultivate vast wisdom and absorb
and retain the Dharma treasury of all buddhas;
May all beings [be enabled to] awaken to the Buddha’s Dharma by
whichever sounds they hear and then cultivate the bodhisattva
practices for countless kalpas;
May all beings abide in right mindfulness and constantly use the
wisdom eye to see the Buddha’s appearances in the world;
May all beings not think of any other endeavors, but rather always
call to mind seeing the Buddha and diligently cultivating the
ten powers;
May all beings always see buddhas everywhere and fully com­
prehend the Tathāgata as pervading the realms of empty space;
May all beings be able to perfect the Buddha’s bodies possessed
of sovereign mastery, gain enlightenment, and expound the
Dharma throughout the ten directions;
May all beings meet good spiritual guides, always listen to the
Dharma of the Buddha, and gain indestructible faith in all
tathāgatas; and
May all beings be able to praise the buddhas’ emergence in the
world and thus enable all those who see them to become puri­
fied.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from praising the Buddha’s emergence in the world. He
makes these dedications to enable beings to see all buddhas, to
make offerings to them and serve them, and to attain ultimate puri­
fication in the unexcelled Dharma.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
large pieces of land: He sometimes gives them to buddhas for the
establishment of monastic dwellings; sometimes gives them to
bodhisattvas or good spiritual guides to use however they wish;
sometime gives them to the monastic Sangha to be used as dwell­
ing places; sometimes gives them to parents; sometimes gives
them to other people, including śrāvaka disciples, pratyekabuddhas,
the many different individuals constituting fields of merit, and so

698

The Flower Adornment Sutra
forth, including giving them to the poor, to orphans, to the solitary,
or to other members of the fourfold community to distribute how­
ever they wish to ensure that no one would want for anything; and
sometimes gives them to be used in the establishment of stupas and
temples dedicated to the Tathāgata. In all places such as these, he
provides all supplementary furnishings, supplies, and necessities
of life, and allows them to be freely used however one wishes so
that no one will have any trepidation on that account. Wherever the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes gifts of land, he dedicates his roots
of goodness in these ways:
May all beings fulfill the purification of the ground of all-knowl­
edge and reach the far shore of perfection in the many practices
of Samantabhadra;
May all beings reach the ground of the complete-retention dhāraṇīs
by which they rightly remember, absorb, and retain all dhar­
mas of the Buddha;
May all beings acquire the power of Dharma stewardship by
which they are always able to preserve and protect the teach­
ings of all buddhas;
May all beings attain a mind like the earth in which their inten­
tions toward all beings are always pure and free of unwhole­
some thoughts;
May all beings preserve the lineage of all buddhas and attain unin­
terrupted success in realizing the entire sequence of grounds;
May all beings everywhere serve as a peaceful and secure refuge
for everyone who enables them all to undergo the training and
dwell in the path of purification;
May all beings benefit the world just as the tathāgatas do, every­
where enabling them to diligently cultivate and dwell securely
in the powers of the Buddha;
May all beings become everywhere loved by those in the world
while enabling them all to dwell securely in the unexcelled
bliss of the Buddha;
May all beings acquire excellent skillful means and dwell in the
Buddha’s powers and dharmas of fearlessness; and
May all beings acquire wisdom as vast as the earth itself and culti­
vate all dharmas of the Buddha with sovereign mastery.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving large pieces of land. He makes these dedi­
cations to enable all beings to gain the ultimate realization of all
tathāgatas’ ground of purity.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
699
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes gifts of
his servants as offerings to all buddhas, bodhisattvas, and genuine
good spiritual guides: He may provide them to the Sangha Jewel;
may provide them to serve parents and venerable fields of merit;
may provide them to serve sick and suffering beings to preserve
their lives and ensure that they do not want for anything; may pro­
vide them for the poor, for orphans, for the solitary, or for all others
who have no one to look after and serve them; may provide them
to preserve and protect the Tathāgata’s stupas and temples; or may
provide them to transcribe and preserve the right Dharma of all
buddhas.
Whenever appropriate, he provides even hundreds of thousands
of koṭīs of nayutas of servants. Those who serve him are intelligent
and skillful, compliant by nature, always diligently vigorous, free
of indolence, and endowed with straightforward minds, happy
minds, beneficial minds, humane and kindly minds, scrupulously
respectful minds, minds free of resentment, minds free of hostil­
ity. They are able to accord with the customs of those for whom
they are working so that they are able to benefit every one of them.
Also, having been influenced by the bodhisattva’s pure actions, of
all the various kinds of skills, arts, crafts, and computational abili­
ties, there are none that they do not completely understand. Thus
they are well able to contribute their service to others in ways that
please them.
The bodhisattva then dedicates all his roots of goodness in these
ways:
May all beings develop compliant minds and cultivate roots of
goodness wherever all buddhas dwell;
May all beings accord with and make offerings to all buddhas and
be able to listen to and absorb whatever the buddhas teach;
May all beings be attracted to the Buddha, always contemplate
the Tathāgata, and remain free of extraneous kinds of thoughts;
May all beings refrain from harming the lineage of the Buddha
and diligently cultivate all roots of goodness in accordance
with the Buddha;
May all beings always be diligent in making offerings to all bud­
dhas and have no time that they allow to pass in vain [by fail­
ing to do so];
May all beings absorb and retain the marvelous meanings and
pure words of the buddhas and thus travel about without fear;
May all beings always delight in seeing the Buddha, never tiring
of doing so, and never being unwilling to even give their lives
for the Buddha;

700

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings be able to see all buddhas, have minds free of defil­
ing attachments, and abandon the things that worldlings rely
on;
May all beings take refuge only in the Buddha and forever aban­
don all erroneous places of refuge; and
May all beings follow the path of the Buddha and have minds that
always delight in contemplating the unsurpassed Dharma of
the Buddha.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when donating servants. He makes these dedications to
enable beings to abandon the defilements, purify the ground of bud­
dhahood, and become able to manifest the sovereignly independent
body of the Tathāgata.388
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives
his body to those who come as supplicants: he arouses a humble
mind; arouses a mind like the earth; arouses a mind that remains
unchanged and unshaken even by the many kinds of sufferings;
arouses a mind that never wearies of serving beings; arouses a mind
toward all beings like that of a kindly mother, dedicating all of the
many kinds of goodness to them; and arouses a mind that forgives
all the many deluded, dangerous, and extremely evil beings for
their many different kinds of aggressive actions. He dwells securely
in roots of goodness and is energetically diligent in his beneficial
endeavors.
The bodhisattva then dedicates all his roots of goodness in these
ways: “May all beings be forever free of deficiencies in whatever
they need; may they constantly and uninterruptedly cultivate the
bodhisattva practices; may they never abandon the meaningful and
beneficial actions of all bodhisattvas; may they skillfully abide in the
path of bodhisattva practice; may they fully comprehend the nature
of the bodhisattva’s dharma of impartiality; may they be able to
abide in the ranks of the Tathāgata’s family lineage; may they abide
in truthful speech; may they uphold the bodhisattva practices; may
they enable the entire world to acquire deep resolve and resolute
faith in the Buddha’s pure Dharma and then achieve the most ulti­
mate degree of Dharma realization; and may they enable all beings
to produce pure and especially supreme roots of goodness, to abide
in the great meritorious qualities, and to gain all-knowledge.”
He also dedicates these roots of goodness to enabling all beings:
to always make offerings to all buddhas; to understand all dharmas;
to accept them, uphold them, study them, and recite them; to never
forget them, never lose them, never damage them, and never allow

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
701
them to become scattered; to develop minds that are well-trained;
to cause those that are not well-trained to become well-trained; and
to use the dharma of quiescence to train them. He enables those
beings to abide in endeavors such as these wherever the buddhas
dwell. Furthermore, he uses these roots of goodness:
To enable all beings to become the most superior stupas worthy of
receiving the world’s many different kinds of offerings;
To enable all beings to become the most supreme fields of merit,
to attain the wisdom of the Buddha, and to awaken everyone;
To enable all beings to become the most supreme recipients [of
offerings] who are thus able to benefit all beings;
To enable all beings to become the most supreme bestowers of
merit who are thus able to cause others to possess all roots of
goodness;
To enable all beings to become the finest objects of giving who are
able to cause [their benefactors] to acquire measureless merit as
their karmic reward;389
To enable all beings to succeed in gaining emancipation from the
three realms of existence;
To enable all beings to become the foremost guides who are able
to show those in the world the path that accords with reality;
To enable all beings to acquire the marvelous complete-retention
dhāraṇīs with which they completely retain all the right Dharma
of all buddhas; and
To enable all beings to realize the measureless and foremost
Dharma realm and possess the right Dharma as unimpeded as
space.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving his own body. He makes these dedications
to enable all beings to acquire the body of measureless wisdom of
those worthy of offerings.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva hears the
Dharma, he feels joyously pleased and arouses thoughts of pure
faith due to which he is able to make an offering of his body to all
buddhas:
He is delighted by and has resolute faith in the unexcelled Dharma
Jewel;
He thinks of all buddhas as he would his own father and mother;
He studies, recites, absorbs, and retains the Dharma of the unim­
peded path;
He everywhere penetrates numberless nayutas of dharmas, jewels
of great wisdom, and gateways to roots of goodness;

702

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He always bears in mind the measurelessly many buddhas;
He penetrates the Buddha’s sphere of action and deeply compre­
hends its meanings and principles;
He is able to use the Tathāgata’s subtle and esoteric brahman
voice to spread forth the cloud of Dharma and rain down the
Buddha’s Dharma rain;
With courage and sovereign mastery, he is able to distinguish and
explain the foremost grounds of those possessed of all-knowl­
edge;
He achieves complete success in the vehicle of omniscience; and
Availing himself of countless hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of
nayutas of great dharmas, he completely develops all his facul­
ties.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva hears
Dharma such as this from the buddhas: he feels measureless joy;
he becomes established in right Dharma; he cuts off his own doubts
and also enables others to cut them off; his mind is always pleased;
his meritorious qualities become fulfilled and his roots of good­
ness become fully developed; his resolve remains constantly and
continuously devoted to benefiting beings without his mind ever
becoming exhausted; he acquires the most supreme wisdom and
becomes a vajra treasury; he draws near to all buddhas and purifies
the buddha kṣetras; and he remains ever diligent in making offer­
ings to all tathāgatas. The bodhisattva then dedicates all his roots of
goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the perfectly developed and most excellent
of bodies and be attracted to all buddhas;
May all beings always draw near to all buddhas and dwell in reli­
ance on all buddhas, forever being able to pay their respects to
them and never leave them;
May all beings acquire the pure and indestructible body and
become fully endowed with all kinds of meritorious qualities
and wisdom;
May all beings always be diligent in making offerings to all bud­
dhas and in practicing the ultimate brahmacarya in which noth­
ing whatsoever is apprehensible;
May all beings acquire the selfless body free of a self or posses­
sions of a self;
May all beings become able to issue division bodies that pervade
the kṣetras of the ten directions like reflections even as they
themselves neither come nor go;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
703
May all beings acquire the body possessed of sovereign mastery
that goes everywhere in the ten directions with no conception
of a self or its feelings;
May all beings be as if born from the body of the Buddha and
abide in the family of those possessed of the unexcelled body;
May all beings acquire the body possessed of the powers of the
Dharma and acquire indestructible power of patience;
May all beings acquire the incomparable body and achieve the
complete realization of the Tathāgata’s pure Dharma body; and
May all beings acquire the body possessed of the world-transcend­
ing meritorious qualities and be born into the pure Dharma
realm in which nothing whatsoever is apprehensible.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving his own body as an offering to the Buddha.
He makes these dedications to enable beings to dwell forever in the
family of all buddhas of the three periods of time.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his body
to all beings wishing to enable them all to develop roots of goodness
and bear roots of goodness in mind. The bodhisattva-mahāsattva
wishes that his body:
Will become a great bright lamp that is everywhere able to illumi­
nate all beings;
Will become an instrument playing many kinds of music390 that is
everywhere able to attract all beings;
Will become a treasury of wondrous Dharma everywhere able to
sustain and support all beings;
Will become pure light that is everywhere able to awaken under­
standing in beings;
Will become light in the world that everywhere always enables
beings to see;
Will become a cause and condition for producing roots of good­
ness that everywhere enables beings to meet with them;
Will become a genuine good spiritual guide enabling all beings to
receive teaching and guidance;
Will become a level road that enables all beings to walk along it;
Will become an unexcelled source of happiness that enables all
beings to attain purity apart from suffering; and
Will become a bright and clearly shining sun that everywhere
equally benefits everyone in the world.
The bodhisattva then dedicates all his roots of goodness in these
ways:

704

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings always draw near to the Buddha and enter the
Buddha’s grounds of wisdom;
May all beings be able to accord with wisdom and dwell in unex­
celled enlightenment;
May all beings always dwell in the Buddha’s congregation and
acquire well-trained minds;
May all beings be principled in all their actions and possess the
Buddha’s awesome deportment;
May all beings reach nirvāṇa through deeply understanding the
meaning of Dharma;
May all beings perfect the practice of being easily satisfied and be
born into the family of the Tathāgata;
May all beings relinquish ignorant desires and dwell in the aspi­
rations of the Buddha;
May all beings develop supreme roots of goodness and come to sit
beneath the bodhi tree;
May all beings slay the thieves of the afflictions and abandon
adversarial and malicious thought; and
May all beings fully guard and preserve all dharmas of the
Buddha.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving his own body to all beings. He makes these
dedications wishing to benefit all beings and enable them to reach
the unexcelled station of peace and security.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva personally
serves all buddhas. Being mindful of his obligation to repay the
extreme kindness of the buddhas, he thinks of them just as he would
think of his own parents. He arouses deep faith in all tathāgatas and,
with a pure mind, guards the bodhi of the Buddha. He dwells in
the Dharma of all buddhas, abandons worldly thought, and takes
birth in the family of the Tathāgata. He accords with all buddhas,
abandons mind states influenced by māras, fully comprehends the
practices of all buddhas, and becomes a vessel for the Dharma of all
buddhas. The bodhisattva then dedicates these roots of goodness
in these ways:
May all beings acquire a purified mind and adorn themselves
with the jewel of all-knowledge;
May all beings dwell in skillful training and abandon all unwhole­
some actions;
May all beings acquire an indestructibly steadfast retinue and be
everywhere able to accumulate and absorb the right Dharma of
all buddhas;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
705
May all beings become disciples of the Buddha and reach the bod­
hisattva’s ground of the summit-anointing consecration;
May all beings always be gathered in and accepted by all buddhas
and forever abandon all unwholesome dharmas;
May all beings follow along in accordance with all buddhas and
cultivate the bodhisattva’s most excellent dharmas;
May all beings enter the realms of the Buddha and be able to
receive the transmission of their prediction of future omni­
science;
May all beings become the same as all tathāgatas in having no
dharma of the buddha in which they do not attain sovereign
mastery;
May all beings be gathered in and accepted by all buddhas and
always be able to cultivate actions free of grasping and attach­
ment; and
May all beings always become the foremost attendants serving all
buddhas and cultivate the wisdom practices under all buddhas.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from providing for and serving all buddhas. He makes
these dedications:
Wishing to realize the bodhi of all buddhas;
Wishing to rescue and protect all beings;
Wishing to gain emancipation from all three realms of existence;
Wishing to perfect a mind free of malevolence or hostility;
In order to realize measurelessly vast bodhi;
Wishing to perfect the wisdom that illuminates the Buddha’s
Dharma;
Wishing to always be drawn in and accepted by all buddhas;
In order to receive all buddhas’ protection and support;
Wishing to develop resolute faith in all dharmas of the Buddha;
Wishing to perfect roots of goodness the same as those of all bud­
dhas of the three periods of time; and
Wishing to perfect a mind that remains free of bitter remorse
because he has realized and acquired the Dharma of all bud­
dhas.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives his
country and everything in it including even his position as the
king, he is able to relinquish everything. In doing so:
His mind gains sovereign mastery in all worldly matters so that
he remains free of fetters, free of bonds, and free of anything at
all to which he is affectionately attached;

706

The Flower Adornment Sutra
He abandons evil actions and benefits beings;
He is not attached to karmic rewards, does not delight in worldly
dharmas, and is no longer tainted by covetousness for any of
the stations of rebirth;
Although he dwells in the world, he is not one who has been born
into this place;391
His mind is not attached to the dharmas of the aggregates, the
sense realms, or the sense bases;
His mind is free of dependence upon any inward or outward
dharmas;
He never forgets any of the bodhisattva practices;
He never abandons any of his good spiritual guides;
He upholds the vast conduct and vows of all bodhisattvas; and
He always delights in serving all good spiritual friends.
The bodhisattva then dedicates these roots of goodness in these
ways:
May all beings become great Dharma kings who gain sovereign
mastery in the Dharma and reach the far shore;
May all beings become kings of the Buddha’s Dharma who utterly
vanquish all the hostile thieves of the afflictions;
May all beings come to dwell in the sovereignty of buddhahood,
acquire the wisdom of the Tathāgata, and proclaim the Dharma
of the Buddha;
May all beings dwell in the Buddha’s sphere of action and be able
to turn the unexcelled wheel of the Dharma of sovereign mas­
tery;
May all beings be born into the family of the Tathāgata, achieve
sovereign mastery in the Dharma, and guard and preserve the
lineage of the Buddha, ensuring that it will never be cut off;
May all beings reveal and explain the countless right dharmas of
the Dharma King and thus bring about the perfection of bound­
lessly many great bodhisattvas;
May all beings dwell in the pure Dharma realm and become great
kings of the Dharma who continuously and uninterruptedly
manifest the Buddha’s appearance in the world;
May all beings become kings of wisdom in all worlds who never
even briefly stop teaching and guiding the many kinds of
beings;
May all beings become Dharma benefactors for all beings in all
worlds throughout the Dharma realm and all realms of space,
thus enabling them all to dwell in the Great Vehicle; and

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
707
May all beings be able to become kings of those replete with all
the many kinds of goodness and have roots of goodness equal
to those of all buddhas of the three periods of time.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving away his position as a king. He makes these
dedications to enable all beings to ultimately dwell in the station of
peace and security.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva sees that
there is a person who has come begging to be given the king’s mar­
velously adorned great capital city along with all taxes and tribute
collected at the country’s frontier gateways, he gives it all to him
with a mind free of any miserly hesitation. He then single-mindedly
turns toward bodhi and makes the great vow to dwell in great kind­
ness, practice great compassion, proceed with zeal and delight to
benefit beings, use vast wisdom to fully understand the profound
Dharma, and dwell in all buddhas’ identical nature of dharmas. He
arouses this resolve in order to seek all-knowledge, to arouse deep
delight in the Dharma of sovereign mastery, to seek the realization
of sovereign wisdom, to purely cultivate all meritorious qualities, to
dwell in solid and vast wisdom, to extensively accumulate all roots
of goodness, to cultivate the Dharma and vows of all buddhas, to
naturally awaken to the Dharma of great wisdom, to maintain irre­
versible resolve in the quest to abide in bodhi, and to cultivate the
conduct and vows of all bodhisattvas and achieve the exhaustive
and ultimate realization of the knowledge of all modes. He then
dedicates these roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings be able to purify countless kṣetras and present
them to all buddhas as dwelling places;
May all beings always delight in dwelling in a forest hermitage in
a state of motionless quiescence;
May all beings never dwell in a capital city or town and may their
minds instead delight in quiescence, always reaching the ulti­
mate realizations;
May all beings never delight in attachment to any world and
always delight in avoiding worldly discourse;
May all beings acquire the mind that renounces covetousness and
give away all their possessions with a mind that remains free
of regrets;
May all beings acquire the resolve to gain emancipation and then
relinquish all endeavors associated with the household life;
May all beings acquire a mind free of miserliness and then always
practice kindly giving;

708

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings acquire a mind that does not become attached to
anything and then abandon the dharmas associated with abid­
ing in the householder’s life;
May all beings succeed in abandoning the many kinds of suffer­
ings and extinguish all fear of disastrous misfortune; and
May all beings purify all worlds of the ten directions and then
offer them up to all buddhas.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving away their royal capital city. He makes these
dedications to enable all beings to purify all buddha kṣetras.
Sons of the Buddha, the many women serving as retainers within
the inner palace of the bodhisattva-mahāsattva are all possessed of
fine appearance and so fully endowed with talent that, whether it
be conversation, humor, singing, or dancing, they are skillful and
marvelous in all circumstances. They adorn their bodies with all
kinds of different clothing and a variety of flowers and perfumes
so that all who see them are delighted and never grow weary of
their presence. That his retinue contains even up to hundreds of
thousands of myriads of koṭīs of nayutas of such precious maidens is
entirely a result of the bodhisattva’s good karmic deeds. They read­
ily respond to his wishes and respectfully comply without a fault.
He gives them all away to whoever comes as a supplicant seeking
to have them, and yet, with regard to them, he remains: free of any
thoughts of loving fondness; free of any thoughts of nostalgic affec­
tion; free of any thoughts of doting attachment; free of thoughts of
being bonded to them; free of thoughts of grasping for them; free
of thoughts of defiling lust for them; free of any discriminating
thoughts about them; free of any thoughts of pursuing them; free of
thoughts of seizing on their physical features; and free of any desire
for them.
Having contemplated all the roots of goodness arising from this,
the bodhisattva then dedicates them to enabling all beings to gain
emancipation, to gain joy in the Dharma, to acquire what is durable
from the midst of what is not durable, to acquire the indestructi­
ble mind of vajra wisdom, to enter the site of enlightenment of the
Buddha, to reach the far shore, to gain the unexcelled resolve to
attain bodhi, to use wisdom to completely comprehend all dhar­
mas, to develop all roots of goodness; and to enter the family of all
buddhas of the three periods of time.
Sons of the Buddha, dwelling in dharmas such as these, the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva gains birth into the family of the Tathāgata,
grows in the pure and supreme causes of all buddhas, produces the

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
709
most excellent path of all-knowledge, deeply enters the bodhisat­
tva’s vast works of wisdom, extinguishes all the world’s defilement
and afflictions, becomes ever able to make offerings to fields of
merit possessed of meritorious qualities, proclaims the wondrous
Dharma for beings and skillfully establishes them in it, enables
them to cultivate all the pure practices, and always diligently accu­
mulates all roots of goodness. The bodhisattva then dedicates all
his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings always acquire a retinue of countless samādhis
and supreme bodhisattva meditative absorptions which remain
uninterruptedly continuous;
May all beings always delight in seeing the Buddha and enter the
samādhi of all buddhas’ adornments;
May all beings perfect the bodhisattva’s inconceivable medita­
tive absorptions in which they possess easeful self-mastery in
countless spiritual superknowledges;
May all beings enter reality-accordant meditative absorptions and
acquire indestructible resolve;
May all beings acquire all the bodhisattva’s extremely deep
samādhis and attain sovereign mastery in all the dhyāna absorp­
tions;
May all beings attain the liberated mind and develop a retinue
consisting of all the samādhis;
May all beings become skillful in the many different kinds of
samādhis and become able to accumulate all the signs of the
samādhis;
May all beings acquire the supreme wisdom samādhi and be able
to train in all of the samādhi gateways;
May all beings acquire the unimpeded samādhis and enter deep
dhyāna absorptions which never diminish or disappear; and
May all beings acquire the samādhi of nonattachment in which
their minds forever abide in right samādhis, never seizing on
dualistic dharmas;
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving away his entire inner-palace retinue. He
makes these dedications:
Wishing to enable all beings to acquire an indestructibly pure
retinue;
Wishing to enable all beings to acquire a retinue of bodhisattvas;
Wishing to enable all beings to fulfill the dharmas of buddha­
hood;

710

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Wishing to enable all beings to achieve complete fulfillment of
the power of all-knowledge;
Wishing to enable all beings to realize unexcelled wisdom;
Wishing to enable all beings to acquire a compliant retinue;
Wishing to enable all beings to dwell together with practitioners
who have the same aspirations;
Wishing to enable all beings to possess all kinds of merit and
wisdom;
Wishing to enable all beings to develop pure roots of goodness;
Wishing to enable all beings to acquire a good and harmonious
retinue;
Wishing to enable all beings to successfully attain the pure
Dharma body of the Tathāgata;
Wishing to enable all beings to develop rightly sequential and
rational eloquence with which they skillfully expound on the
inexhaustible Dharma treasury of all buddhas;
Wishing to enable all beings to forever abandon all mundane
roots of goodness and join in cultivating pure world-transcend­
ing roots of goodness;
Wishing to enable all beings to attain complete fulfillment of
pure karma and perfect all dharmas of purity; and
Wishing to enable all beings to directly manifest all dharmas of
buddhahood and use the light of Dharma to attain complete
purification.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is able to give
away even his own beloved wife and children, doing so in the same
way as did Prince Sudāna, Manifest Adornment King Bodhisattva,
and countless other such bodhisattvas of the past. At such a time,
availing himself of the resolve to gain all-knowledge, the bodhisat­
tva practices giving everything, purely cultivating the bodhisat­
tva’s path of giving. His mind remains pure and free of regrets. He
completely relinquishes all that he treasures in seeking to gain all-
knowledge and seeking to enable all beings to arouse the pure and
profound aspiration to accomplish the bodhi practices, contemplate
the bodhisattva path, remain mindful of the Buddha’s bodhi, and
dwell in the lineage of the Buddha.
Having fully developed such a mind of giving, the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva makes the definite resolve to seek the body of a tathāgata.
He contemplates his own body as bound up in every way and
unable to gain independence. He also devotes his body to attracting
all beings, allowing it to be like an isle of jewels which are given
away to everyone. Thus he enables those who are not yet satisfied

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
711
to become fully satisfied. In this way, the bodhisattva is protectively
mindful of beings, wishing to make his own body the most excel­
lent of stupas which causes everyone to be delighted, wishing to
produce an impartial mind toward those in the world, wishing to
become like a clear and cool pool for beings, wishing to provide
every kind of happiness to beings, and wishing to become a great
benefactor for beings.
With sovereign mastery in wisdom, he thoroughly knows the
bodhisattva conduct. Thus he is able to adorn himself with the great
vows and progress toward all-knowledge. He vows to become an
unexcelled field of merit for the attainment of wisdom. He is every­
where mindful of beings, always following and protecting them
even as he is still able to accomplish what is beneficial for himself.
As the light of his wisdom everywhere illuminates the world, he is
always diligently mindful of the bodhisattva’s motivation to give
and constantly delights in contemplating the Tathāgata’s sphere of
action.
Sons of the Buddha, with an unfettered, unattached, and lib­
erated mind, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates the roots of
goodness accumulated through giving away his wife and children,
doing so in these ways:
May all beings come to abide in the bodhi of the Buddha and pro­
duce transformation bodies which turn the irreversible wheel
of Dharma throughout the Dharma realm;
May all beings acquire the unattached body which, through the
power of vows, travels everywhere to all buddha kṣetras;
May all beings relinquish thoughts of love and hate and cut off the
fetters of covetousness and anger;
May all beings become sons of the Buddha who follow the prac­
tices of the Buddha;
May all beings remain steadfast in conceiving of the buddhas as
of the same mind as their own;
May all beings always become sons of the Buddha transforma­
tionally born from the Dharma;
May all beings reach the ultimate place and perfect the masterful
wisdom of the Tathāgata;
May all beings realize the bodhi of the Buddha and forever aban­
don the afflictions;
May all beings become able to comprehensively expound on the
path to the Buddha’s bodhi and always delight in cultivating
unexcelled Dharma giving;

712

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings acquire the mind of right meditative absorption in
which no conditions can interfere with them; and
May all beings come to sit beneath the bodhi tree, gain the utmost
right enlightenment, and teach countless sons and daughters
of good family who become transformationally born from the
Dharma.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving away his wife and children. He makes these
dedications to enable all beings to realize unimpeded liberation and
the wisdom that remains free of attachments.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is willing to
give away his adorned residences and all their furnishings to who­
ever seeks to acquire them. In practicing the dharma of giving, he
remains free of attachment to his household, abandons all the dis­
cursive thinking of the householder’s life, and grows weary of fam­
ily business. He does not covet or have any taste for the material
necessities of life and his mind remains free of any binding attach­
ment to them. Realizing that the household is easily destroyed, his
mind abides in such constant renunciation of it that he remains free
of any fondness for it.
He wishes only to leave behind the home life, cultivate the bod­
hisattva practices, and adorn himself with the Dharma of all bud­
dhas. In relinquishing everything, his mind is free of regrets. He
is one who is always praised by all buddhas. He gives away with
kindness all of his houses, valuables, and everything that he pos­
sesses anywhere, doing so with a mind that is free of affectionate
attachment for any of it. Whenever he sees a supplicant coming, he
feels joyful. The bodhisattva then dedicates these roots of goodness
in these ways:
May all beings come to give up their wives and children and per­
fect the supreme bliss of those who leave the home life;
May all beings become liberated from the bonds of the house­
hold, enter into homelessness, and cultivate brahmacarya in the
Dharma of all buddhas;
May all beings relinquish the defilement of miserliness and may
their minds never retreat from their delight in giving every­
thing;
May all beings forever abandon the dharmas of the home life and
become satisfied with but few desires and having nothing that
they accumulate for themselves;
May all beings leave the world’s mundane household and dwell in
the house of the Tathāgata;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
713
May all beings acquire the unimpeded Dharma and do away with
the path beset with every type of obstacle;
May all beings abandon their love of family and, though they
manifest as dwelling in the household, may their minds become
free of all attachments;
May all beings become well able to teach and guide others and
speak with the wisdom of the Buddha even when they have not
yet abandoned the dharmas of the householder;
May all beings have minds which dwell in accordance with the
wisdom of the buddha even when their bodies abide in the
household; and
May all beings dwell on the ground of buddhahood even as they
dwell on the grounds of their households and may they thus
enable countless beings to have joyous minds.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness when giving away his houses. He makes these dedica­
tions to enable beings to perfect the bodhisattva’s many different
kinds of conduct and vows, spiritual superknowledges, and wis­
dom.
Sons of the Buddha, as the bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives away
all of his many different kinds of parks, groves, terraces, and other
adorned places for roaming happily about, he reflects in these ways:
I should serve all beings as a fine garden and grove;
I should reveal the bliss of Dharma for all beings;
I should give all beings a joyous mind;
I should show all beings boundless joy;
I should open for all beings the gateways to pure Dharma;
I should enable all beings to manifest a joyous mind;
I should enable all beings to realize the bodhi of the Buddha;
I should enable all beings to fulfill the great vows;
I should become like a kindly father for all beings;
I should enable all beings to contemplate with wisdom;
I should give all beings the necessities of life; and
I should become like a kindly mother for all beings who promotes
the growth of their roots of goodness and great vows.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva cultivates
roots of goodness in these ways, he does not become weary of evil
beings or make the mistake of rejecting them altogether. Even if
the whole world were to be filled with beings who all felt no grati­
tude for his kindness, the bodhisattva would still never feel resent­
ful and would not produce even a moment’s thought of retaliation.

714

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Rather he would only wish to extinguish their measureless suffer­
ings and afflictions.
In all worlds, his mind is like empty space, free of defiling attach­
ments. He everywhere contemplates the true character of all dhar­
mas. He makes the great vow to extinguish the suffering of beings
and never wearies of his Great Vehicle resolve. Extinguishing all
views, he cultivates the impartial conduct and vows of all bodhisat­
tvas.
Sons of the Buddha, having engaged in such contemplations, the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva gathers all his roots of goodness and dedi­
cates them thus:
May all beings give birth to countless good dharmas in every
mind-moment and develop a mind like an unexcelled garden
and grove;
May all beings acquire the dharma of imperturbability, see all
buddhas, and delight them all;
May all beings delight in the gardens of the Dharma and attain
sublime bliss in the gardens of the buddha kṣetras;
May all beings acquire the pure and sublime mind with which
they always see the gardens and groves of the Tathāgata’s psy­
cho-physical spiritual powers;
May all beings acquire the enjoyments of a buddha and always
delight in roaming with easeful mastery in the realms of wis­
dom;
May all beings acquire the bliss of roaming with easeful mastery,
everywhere visiting the congregations at the sites of enlighten­
ment in all buddha kṣetras;
May all beings perfect the roaming with easeful mastery in the
bodhisattva’s liberations, tirelessly practicing the bodhisattva
practices to the end of all future kalpas;
May all beings see all buddhas filling the entire Dharma realm
and then arouse the vast resolve to dwell in the gardens and
groves of the buddhahood;
May all beings become able to travel everywhere to all buddha
kṣetras and make offerings to the buddhas in each kṣetra; and
May all beings acquire the mind of wholesome zeal to purify and
adorn all buddha kṣetras.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from giving away all his gardens, groves, and terraces.
He makes these dedications to enable beings to see all buddhas and
roam with easeful mastery in the gardens and groves of all bud­
dhas.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
715
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva convenes
countless hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of vast charita­
ble assemblies devoted to giving which, being entirely pure, would
be approved by all buddhas. He never harms or torments any being
and he everywhere enables beings to abandon the many kinds of
evil, to purify the three kinds of karmic action, and to develop wis­
dom.
He establishes countless hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayu­
tas of asaṃkhyeyas of pure realms where he gathers together count­
less hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of asaṃkhyeyas of mar­
velous necessities of life, and, arousing the extremely rare bodhi
resolve, he then carries out limitless acts of giving.
He enables all beings to dwell in the path of purity, good in the
beginning, middle, and end, and also inspires them to arouse pure
resolute faith. Adapting to whatever pleases the minds of countless
hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of beings, he enables them all to be
happy and uses great kindness and great compassion to rescue and
protect them all. He serves and makes offerings to all buddhas of the
three periods of time and, wishing to successfully carry on the lin­
eage of all buddhas, he cultivates giving with a mind free of regret.
He increases the growth of his faculty of faith, completely fulfills
the supreme practices, and, in each successive mind-moment, pro­
gresses in his practice of dāna pāramitā. The bodhisattva then dedi­
cates all his roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings arouse the Great Vehicle resolve and perfect the
Mahāyāna’s practice of giving;
May all beings become able to practice giving in great assemblies,
exhaustive giving, wholesome giving, most supreme giving,
unexcelled giving, utmost unexcelled giving, giving that is the
equal of the unequaled, giving superior to any in all worlds,
and giving praised by all buddhas;
May all beings become foremost benefactors who liberate beings
from all the wretched destinies, enabling them all to enter the
path of unimpeded wisdom, to cultivate impartial vows and
genuine roots of goodness, to become free of discrimination,
and to realize their own inherent wisdom;
May all beings abide in the quiescent dhyāna absorptions and
knowledges, enter the path of immortality, reach the ultimate
realization of all spiritual superknowledges and wisdom, fulfill
all the grounds with courageous vigor, adorn the Dharma of
the Buddha, and never retreat from reaching the far shore;

716

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings establish great charitable assemblies devoted to
tirelessly and ceaselessly providing for beings and may they
ultimately attain the unexcelled knowledge of all modes;
May all beings be constantly diligent in planting all roots of good­
ness and then reach the far shore of perfection of the countless
meritorious qualities;
May all beings always be praised by all buddhas and everywhere
become great benefactors for the world who, fully endowed
with meritorious qualities that fill the Dharma realm, every­
where illuminate the ten directions, bestowing unexcelled hap­
piness on others;
May all beings establish great charitable assemblies, extensively
accumulate roots of goodness, and equally attract all beings,
seeing to their success in reaching the far shore;
May all beings perfect the most supreme giving, everywhere
enabling beings to abide in the foremost vehicle;
May all beings practice timely giving, always avoiding untimely
giving, and may they practice the most ultimate kind of great
giving;
May all beings accomplish good giving that reaches the far shore
of the perfection of great giving as practiced by the Buddha, the
great man;
May all beings consummate the constant practice of magnificent
giving, always taking all buddhas as their teachers, drawing
near to them all, and presenting great offerings to them;
May all beings abide in pure giving, accumulate measureless
merit as vast as the Dharma realm, and reach the far shore; and
May all beings become great benefactors in all worlds who vow to
liberate all the many kinds of beings and lead them to dwell on
the ground of the Tathāgata.
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of roots of
goodness from establishing great charitable assemblies. He makes
these dedications to enable beings to practice unexcelled giving, to
consummate giving as practiced by a buddha, to perfect wholesome
giving and indestructible giving, to make offerings to all buddhas,
to become free of regrets when giving, to practice giving that res­
cues beings, to practice giving leading to all-knowledge, to practice
giving leading to always seeing all buddhas, to practice good and
vigorous giving, and to practice vast giving leading to perfecting all
bodhisattva qualities and the wisdom of all buddhas.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is unstintingly
generous in giving all the necessities of life. He seeks no karmic

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
717
reward nor does he wish to obtain any worldly wealth or happiness.
He abandons the discursively thinking mind and skillfully reflects
on the Dharma. Wishing to benefit all beings, he deeply contem­
plates the true nature of all dharmas and, adapting to the differ­
ences in beings and to the various things they find useful and seek
to acquire, he prepares countless necessities of life for them, deco­
rating them all with exquisitely fine adornments. He then practices
boundless giving, practices giving everything, and practices com­
plete inward and outward giving. When he practices this giving,
he increases the power of his determination, acquires great meri­
torious qualities, and perfects the jewel of the mind. He is always
able to protect all beings and enable them to make the especially
supreme vows. Even from the very beginning, he has never had any
thoughts of seeking any sort of reward in return. It is by resort to
all his roots of goodness, equal to those of the buddhas of the three
periods of time, that he accomplishes the complete fulfillment of the
knowledge of all modes.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all
these roots of goodness from his practice of giving, [doing so in
these ways]:
May all beings become trained in purity;
May all beings extinguish the afflictions and purify all buddha
kṣetras;
May all beings, with a pure mind, pervade the Dharma realm in
but a single mind-moment;
May all beings have wisdom that completely fills empty space
and the Dharma realm;
May all beings attain all-knowledge, everywhere penetrate the
three periods of time, and train beings, in all times forever
turning the irreversible wheel of the pure Dharma;
May all beings perfect all-knowledge and become well able to
manifest spiritual superknowledges and skillful means to ben­
efit beings;
May all beings become able to awaken to and enter the bodhi of
the buddhas and always incessantly expound on right Dharma
in all worlds of the ten directions, doing so until the very end of
future kalpas, thereby enabling all beings everywhere to hear
and understand it;
May all beings cultivate the bodhisattva practices for countless
kalpas and completely fulfill them all;
May all beings cultivate the bodhisattva practices for countless
kalpas in all worlds which can be described among all types of

718

The Flower Adornment Sutra
worlds, having none in which they do not become pervasively
present, whether those worlds be defiled or immaculate, small
or immense, coarse or subtle, inverted or upward-facing, or
adorned in but one way or adorned in many different ways; and
May all beings always perform the works of all buddhas of the
three periods of time, doing so in every successive mind-
moment as they teach beings and continue to progress toward
all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, whatever beings need, the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva gives them asaṃkhyeyas of things such as these. To
enable the Buddha’s Dharma to continue on without interruption,
he uses the great compassion to rescue all beings, becomes securely
established in the great kindness, cultivates the bodhisattva prac­
tices, and never transgresses against the instructions of the Buddha.
He uses skillful expedient means to cultivate the many kinds of
goodness and prevent the lineage of all buddhas from being cut off.
Whatever supplicants might seek from him, without any dis­
tress or displeasure, he relinquishes it all without ever feeling any
regret and then always diligently dedicates this to the path of all-
knowledge.
Even if all the various kinds of beings from the various desti­
nies of rebirth in the lands of the ten directions together with all
the many different fields of merit all gathered together and came
to the bodhisattva with all different kinds of requests for things
they sought to obtain, having observed this, the bodhisattva would
then welcome them all with a joyful mind just as if he were see­
ing his good spiritual friends. With great compassion and heartfelt
commiseration, he would think about how to fulfill their requests.
His motivation to give would increase, and, ceaselessly and tire­
lessly, whatever they sought, he would enable their requests to be
completely fulfilled so that they could become free of the suffer­
ings of poverty. The minds of those supplicants would then be filled
with such great joy that they would proclaim the praises of his vir­
tues even more so that his exquisite reputation would spread afar,
inspiring everyone to come and take refuge in him.
Having witnessed this, the bodhisattva would feel measureless
happiness. Then, even if someone were able to enjoy the bliss of
Indra for a hundred thousand koṭīs of nayutas of kalpas, the bliss
of the Suyāma Heavens for countless kalpas, the bliss of the Tuṣita
Heavens for incalculably many kalpas, the bliss of the Nirmāṅarati
Heavens for boundlessly many kalpas, the bliss of the Paranirmita-
vaśavartin Heavens for incomparably many kalpas, the bliss of the

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
719
Brahma Heaven King for innumerably many kalpas, the bliss of a
wheel-turning sage king ruling over a trichiliocosm for indescrib­
ably many kalpas, the bliss of the Universal Purity Heaven for incon­
ceivably many kalpas, and the bliss of the Pure Abode Heavens
for an ineffable number of kalpas, even so, his bliss would still be
unable to approach the joyous delight and celebratory exultation of
this bodhisattva-mahāsattva when he sees these supplicants com­
ing to him, at which point his mind of faith would increase, his
aspirations would become purified, his faculties would become
well-trained, his resolute belief would become fully developed, and
he would progress toward the bodhi of all buddhas.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva then dedicates
these roots of goodness:
Wishing to benefit all beings;
Wishing to enable all beings to be happy;
To enable all beings to gain great benefit;
To enable all beings to attain purity;
To enable all beings to seek bodhi;
To enable all beings to gain equanimity;
To enable all beings to acquire worthy and good minds;
To enable all beings to enter the Mahāyāna;
To enable all beings to gain worthy and good wisdom; and
To enable all beings to possess the conduct and vows of
Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, attain complete fulfillment in the
vehicle of the ten powers, and manifest the realization of right
enlightenment.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all
these roots of goodness in these ways, he becomes liberated in all
physical, verbal, and mental actions so that he is then free of attach­
ments and bonds, free of any conception of a being, free of any con­
ception of a life span, free of any conception of a pudgala, free of any
conception of a person, free of any conception of a pure youth, free
of any conception of anyone who is born, free of any conception of
any agent of actions, free of any conception of anyone who under­
goes anything, free of any conception of existence, free of any con­
ception of nonexistence, free of any conception of a present life or
a future life, free of any conception of dying here and being reborn
there, free of any conception of permanence, free of any conception
of impermanence, free of any conception of the three realms of exis­
tence, free of any conception of the nonexistence of the three realms
of existence, and neither perceives nor does not perceive.

720

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Thus his dedications are not bound dedications, are not unbound
dedications, are not dedications involving actions, are not dedica­
tions involving karmic effects of actions, are not dedications involv­
ing discriminations, are not dedications free of discriminations, are
not dedications involving thought, are not dedications subsequent
to thought, are not mental dedications, and are not mindless dedica­
tions.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva performs
dedications such as these: he is not inwardly attached; he is not out­
wardly attached; he is not attached to a subject; he is not attached
to an object; he is not attached to cause; he is not attached to effect;
he is not attached to Dharma; he is not attached to non-Dharma; he
is not attached to thought; he is not attached to non-thought; he is
not attached to form; he is not attached to the production of form;
he is not attached to the destruction of form; he is not attached to
feelings, perceptions, karmic formative factors, or consciousness; he
is not attached to the production of feelings, perceptions, karmic
formative factors, or consciousness; and he is not attached to the
destruction of feelings, perceptions, karmic formative factors, or
consciousness.
Sons of the Buddha, if the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is able to
remain unattached to any of these dharmas, then: he is not bound
by form; he is not bound by the production of form; he is not bound
by the destruction of form; he is not bound by feeling, perceptions,
karmic formative factors, or consciousness; he is not bound by the
production of feeling, perceptions, karmic formative factors, or con­
sciousness; and he is not bound by the destruction of feeling, per­
ceptions, karmic formative factors, or consciousness.
If he is able to remain unbound by any of these dharmas, then he
does not have any liberation from these dharmas either. And why
is this? This is because, whether now produced, whether already
produced, or whether produced in the future, not even the slightest
dharma exists. There is no dharma that can be grasped and there is
no dharma to which anyone could become attached. All dharmas
are inherently of this sort. They have no inherent existence of their
own and are inherently incompatible with characteristics. They are
neither singular nor dual, neither manifold nor countless, neither
small nor large, neither narrow nor wide, neither deep nor shallow,
neither quiescent nor the bases of conceptual proliferation, neither
based nor baseless; neither dharmas nor non-dharmas, neither sub­
stantial nor non-substantial, and neither existent nor nonexistent.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
721
When the bodhisattva contemplates dharmas in this way, then
it is as non-dharmas, as conventions established in verbal discourse
to accord with the world, and as non-dharmas acting as dharmas.
Even so, he does not cut short the path of karmic deeds and does not
abandon the bodhisattva practices. Rather, he continues his quest
for all-knowledge and never retreats from it.
He fully realizes that all karmic conditions are like a dream, that
sounds are like echoes, that beings are like mere reflections, and
that all dharmas are like magical conjurations. Still, he knows that,
even so, this does not interfere with the power of causes, condi­
tions, and karma. He fully realizes that karmic actions possess vast
functions. He understands that all dharmas have nothing that they
create. He practices the path of effortless non-doing and never even
briefly desists from this.
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva dwells in [the
path to] all-knowledge. Whether reality-based or not, he dedicates
everything to realizing the nature of all-knowledge. In every cir­
cumstance, he performs such dedications and never retreats from
his practice of doing so. What is meant by “dedications”?
They are called dedications because they are done to forever liber­
ate those in the world so they reach the far shore;
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] forever transcend the aggregates and reach the far
shore;
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] cross beyond the path of speech and reach the far
shore;
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] abandon the various perceptions and reach the far
shore;
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] to cut off personality view392 and reach the far shore;.
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] forever abandon whatever they depend on and reach
the far shore;
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] forever cut off the conception of anything that is done
and reach the far shore;
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] forever escape all realms of existence and reach the
far shore;

722

The Flower Adornment Sutra
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] forever relinquish all grasping and reach the far
shore; and
They are called dedications because they are [done to enable
beings to] forever transcend worldly dharmas and reach the far
shore.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes ded­
ications such as these, he dwells in accordance with the Buddha,
dwells in accordance with the Dharma, dwells in accordance with
wisdom, dwells in accordance with bodhi, dwells in accordance
with what is meaningful, dwells in accordance with dedications,
dwells in accordance with the spheres of experience, dwells in
accordance with the practices, dwells in accordance with reality,
and dwells in accordance with purity.
Sons of the Buddha, if the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes dedi­
cations in these ways, he comprehends all dharmas and serves all
buddhas, not having even one buddha he does not serve, not hav­
ing even one dharma for which he fails to make offerings, not hav­
ing even one dharma that could be destroyed, not having even one
dharma he could abandon, not having even one thing to which he
could become covetously attached, not having even one dharma
that he could renounce, and not seeing even the slightest dharma,
whether inward or outward, that could be destroyed or which could
contradict the path of causes and conditions. He is fully and inces­
santly possessed of the power of the Dharma.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s sixth dedication, the dedication to strengthening all
roots of goodness. When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides in
this dedication, he is always regarded with protective mindfulness
by all buddhas. He is solidly irreversible in penetrating the deep
nature of dharmas and in cultivating all-knowledge in accordance
with the meaning of dharmas, in accordance with the nature of
dharmas, in accordance with all solidly enduring roots of good­
ness, and in accordance with the perfect fulfillment of great vows,
completely according with dharmas so solidly as to be invulnerable
to harm even by any vajra. Thus he attains sovereign mastery in all
dharmas.
At that time, having contemplated the ten directions, contemplated
the assembled congregation, and contemplated the Dharma realm,
Vajra Banner Bodhisattva penetrated the extremely profound mean­
ing of these words and statements, cultivated the immeasurably vast

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
723
mind, covered the entire world with the mind of great compassion,
developed the mind of the lineage of all buddhas of the past, future,
and present, penetrated the meritorious qualities of all buddhas, per­
fected the body of all buddhas possessed of the powers of sovereign
mastery, contemplated the mental dispositions of beings, accorded
with the capacity of their roots of goodness to become ripened, relied
on the Dharma nature body in manifesting the form body for their
sakes, and, aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, spoke these
verses:
The bodhisattva manifests bodies serving as kings of countries,
becoming in all worldly positions the one who is most incomparable.
With merit and awesome radiance supreme over all,
he everywhere produces benefit for all the many kinds of beings.
His mind is pure and free of all defiling attachments.
With sovereign mastery in the world, he is obeyed and revered by all.
Widely proclaiming right Dharma to provide instruction to the people,
he everywhere enables beings to attain peace and security.
He manifests birth into noble families, ascends to the royal throne,
and always relies on right teaching as he turns the wheel of Dharma.
He is by nature humane, kind, and free of any inclination to cruelty.
Reverently admiring him, all in the ten directions follow his guidance.
His wisdom and discernment are always completely clear
and his physical appearance and talents are all fully complete.
In his governing and leading the country, no one fails to obey him.
He vanquishes the armies of Māra, doing away with them all.
He solidly upholds pure moral precepts, stays free of transgressions,
possesses decisive resolve and patience that cannot be shaken,
forever wishes to cleanse himself of all thoughts of anger,
and always delights in cultivating the Dharma of all buddhas.
Beverages, food, fragrances, garlands, and robes
as well as carriages, horses, couches, cushions, chairs, and lanterns—
The bodhisattva gives all of these to the people
while also providing them with countless other such things.
He practices giving in order to benefit others
and in order to enable them to arouse the vast resolve.
When giving to the Venerable Victorious Ones393 and others,
his mind is in all cases pure and filled with joy.
The bodhisattva gives everything everywhere.
Whether it is inward or outward, he is able to relinquish it all.
He certainly causes his mind to remain forever pure
and never allows it to become narrow or inferior for even a moment.

724

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sometimes he gives his head, sometimes gives his eyes,
sometimes gives his hands, and sometimes gives his feet.
His skin, flesh, bones, marrow, and other such things—
He sacrifices them all with a mind that is forever free of miserliness.
The bodhisattva’s body may dwell in the position of a great king
or in an aristocratic and noble lineage as one revered among men,
yet he may open his mouth, cut out his tongue, and give it to beings
with a joyously delighted mind free of any concern or clinging to it.
He then takes all the merit from that giving of his tongue
and dedicates it to benefiting all beings,
wishing that, in reliance on these supreme causes and conditions,
everyone will acquire a tathāgata’s broad and long tongue.
He sometimes gives away his wife, his sons, and his royal throne
and sometimes gives his body to provide the work of a servant,
doing so with a pure mind always abiding in joyous delight,
remaining free of worries or regrets in all such circumstances as these.
Whatever others delight in or seek, he gives it all to them and
never wearies of practicing timely giving.
He is able to distribute everything he owns
and completely satisfies everyone who comes to him as a supplicant.
He gives his body in order to be able to hear the Dharma,
cultivates all kinds of austerities as he seeks to realize bodhi,
also sacrifices everything for the sake of beings,
and never retreats from his quest to acquire unexcelled wisdom.
Due to having heard right Dharma from the Buddha,
he then gives up his own body to serve as his attendant.
Then, wishing to rescue all beings,
he arouses thoughts of measureless joy in doing so.
He observes the ability of the Bhagavat, the Great Guide,
to bestow vast benefit with the mind of loving-kindness.
Then, filled with exultation, he becomes joyful
on hearing and absorbing the flavor of the Tathāgata’s deep Dharma.
The bodhisattva’s roots of goodness
are all dedicated to all beings
with the intention to rescue them all without exception
and forever enable their liberation and perpetual happiness.
The bodhisattva’s entire retinue consists of those possessing
majestic physical features and the ability to be eloquent and wise
who are replete with flower garlands, robes, and perfumes
and the many different kinds of adornments.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
725
All those in this entire retinue, so extremely rare—
the bodhisattva is able to give them all away.
Solely devoted to right awakening and liberating the many beings—
He never even briefly relinquishes such resolve.
In this way, the bodhisattva deeply contemplates
and fully implements the many different kinds of vast karmic works
and then dedicates them to all sentient beings,
and yet never raises any thoughts of grasping or attachment.
The bodhisattva is willing to relinquish his position as a great king
as well as his country, all of its cities, its outlying areas,
his palaces, towers, gardens, and groves,
and those who serve and protect him, giving all without reservation.
For countless hundreds of thousands of kalpas,
in place after place, he travels all about practicing giving,
doing so to teach and guide the many kinds of beings,
enabling them all to pass beyond and ascend the unexcelled shore.
Countless kinds of beings, each of them different,
come and gather from the worlds of the ten directions.
Having observed this, the bodhisattva’s mind feels overjoyed
and completely satisfies them all, each according to his needs.
Just as with the dedications made by all buddhas of the three times,
the bodhisattva also cultivates just such works as these.
Whatever has been practiced by the Bhagavat, the Trainer of Men—
he follows along, training in all of it, reaching the far shore.
The bodhisattva contemplates all dharmas, investigating:
“Who is it that is able to penetrate these dharmas?”
“How does one achieve entry?” “What is it that is entered?”
Practicing giving in this way, his mind has no place it dwells.
The knowledge of expedients used in the bodhisattva’s dedications,
the skillful means dharmas adopted in the bodhisattva’s dedications,
the ultimate reality of the bodhisattva’s dedications—
He remains free of any attachment to any of these dharmas.
His mind does not discriminate among any actions
nor does he have any defiling attachment to the fruits of actions.
He knows394 that the nature of bodhi arises from conditions
and enters the deep Dharma realm without opposition.
He does not hold that karma exists in the body,
nor does he hold that it abides in the mind.
With wisdom, he fully realizes karma has no inherent nature,
yet, because of causes and conditions, karma is never lost.

726

The Flower Adornment Sutra
His mind does not erroneously grasp at past dharmas
nor does it have any covetous attachment to future matters.
He does not have any dwelling in the present, either,
and fully comprehends the three times are all empty and quiescent.
The bodhisattva has already reached the far shore in [fathoming] form.
So too with feeling, perception, formative factors, and consciousness.
He has stepped entirely out of the world’s flow of births and deaths,
even as his mind remains humble and is always pure.
He deeply contemplates the five aggregates, the eighteen sense realms,
and the twelve sense bases as well as his own body,
seeking for bodhi in every one of these,
and finds their essential nature cannot ever finally be apprehended.
He does not seize on any signs of dharmas as permanent,
nor does he become attached to any signs of their annihilation.
The nature of dharmas is neither existent nor nonexistent,
and there is no end to the sequential unfolding of karma’s principle.
He does not abide in any dharma,
nor does he perceive the existence of either beings or bodhi.
Even seeking them in the lands of the ten directions and three times,
he finds that ultimately nothing at all that can be apprehended.
If one is able to contemplate all dharmas in this way,
then, just as is understood by all buddhas,
although one seeks for their nature, it cannot be apprehended.
Even so, the bodhisattva’s practices are still not done in vain.
The bodhisattva fully knows it is from conditions that dharmas exist
and knows this does not contradict any of the paths that are practiced.
He reveals and explains all the traces left by karmic deeds,
wishing to enable all beings to attain purification.
This is the path that is practiced by those who are wise
and that has been proclaimed by all the tathāgatas.
If one follows it, meditates on it, and penetrates its right meaning
then one will naturally awaken and realize bodhi.
All dharmas have no arising or destruction
and also have no coming or going.
One does not die here and then become reborn there.
One realizing this understands and awakens to all buddhas’ Dharma.
If one fully comprehends the true nature of dharmas
and still makes no discriminations regarding the nature of dharmas,
knowing dharmas have no nature and being free of discriminations,
this person has thoroughly penetrated the wisdom of all buddhas.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
727
The nature of dharmas pervades all places,
including all beings as well as their lands.
It is present in all three periods of time without exception,
and yet it still has no form or features that can be apprehended at all.
Everything to which all buddhas have so completely awakened,
he has taken it all in and grasped it all without exception.
Although one might speak of all dharmas of the three periods of time,
all such dharmas as these are all nonexistent.
Just as the nature of all dharmas is everywhere pervasive,
so too it is with the dedications performed by the bodhisattva.
It is in this way that he makes dedications to all beings,
forever remaining in the world, never retreating.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication that equally accords with all beings? Sons
of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva accords with whatever
roots of goodness have been accumulated, namely: small roots of
goodness, great roots of goodness, vast roots of goodness, abundant
roots of goodness, measureless roots of goodness, various roots of
goodness, roots of goodness as numerous as atoms, asaṃkhyeyas of
roots of goodness, boundlessly many roots of goodness, inconceiv­
ably many roots of goodness, immeasurably many roots of good­
ness, roots of goodness related to the sphere of the buddhas, roots
of goodness related to the sphere of the Dharma, roots of goodness
related to the sphere of the Sangha, roots of goodness related to
the sphere of good spiritual guides, roots of goodness related to
the sphere of all beings, roots of goodness related to the sphere of
skillful means, roots of goodness related to cultivating all good
thoughts, roots of goodness related to inward objects, roots of
goodness related to outward objects, roots of goodness related to
the sphere of the boundlessly many aids to enlightenment, roots
of goodness related to diligently cultivating giving away every­
thing, roots of goodness related to the supreme resolve to maintain
ultimate purity in observing the moral precepts, roots of goodness
related to patience in which one maintains equanimity in all things
and has nothing one cannot endure, roots of goodness related to
always being vigorous and maintaining irreversible resolve, roots
of goodness related to using great skillful means to enter count­
less samādhis, roots of goodness related to using wisdom in skill­
ful contemplations, roots of goodness related to knowing the dif­
ferences in all beings’ mental behavior, roots of goodness related
to accumulating boundless meritorious qualities, roots of goodness

728

The Flower Adornment Sutra
related to diligently cultivating the bodhisattva’s actions and prac­
tices, and roots of goodness related to protecting and nurturing
those in all worlds.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva cultivates and
securely abides in these roots of goodness, enters them, absorbs
them, accumulates them, procures them, comprehends them, and
attains purity of mind with them. As he begins to develop them,
he acquires the mind of patience, closes the gates to the wretched
destinies, skillfully controls his faculties, becomes fully possessed
of the awesome deportment, abandons the inverted views, achieves
perfect fulfillment of right conduct, becomes capable of serving
as a vessel for the Dharma of all buddhas, becomes able to serve
beings as a good field of merit, becomes one of whom the Buddha
is mindful, grows the roots of goodness for buddhahood, dwells in
the vows of all buddhas, performs the works of all buddhas, attains
sovereign mastery of mind equal even to that of all buddhas of the
three periods of time, progresses toward the site of enlightenment
of buddhahood, enters the powers of a tathāgata, acquires the physi­
cal marks of a buddha, transcends all worlds, does not delight in
celestial rebirth, does not covet the happiness of wealth, and is not
attached to any of the practices.
Dedicating all his roots of goodness, he becomes a treasury of
meritorious qualities for all beings, dwells in the ultimate path,
everywhere protects everyone, pulls beings out of the paths of false­
ness, and enables them to abide securely in all good dharmas. He
ceaselessly and endlessly pervades all realms, opens the gates to
all-knowledge and bodhi, erects the banner of wisdom, and puri­
fies the great path. He is everywhere able to manifest in all worlds
and enable the elimination of defilements. With a mind that is well
trained, he is born into the family of the Tathāgata, purifies the lin­
eage of the buddhas, becomes perfectly replete in meritorious quali­
ties, becomes a great field for the planting of merit, and becomes
a refuge for those in the world. He establishes beings by enabling
them all to attain purity and always diligently cultivate all kinds of
roots of goodness.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva culti­
vates all roots of goodness with the power of his pure vows and his
bodhi resolve, he reflects in this way: “These roots of goodness are
accumulated by the resolve to attain bodhi, are contemplated by the
resolve to attain bodhi, are initiated by the resolve to attain bodhi,
are willed by the resolve to attain bodhi, and are increased by the
resolve to attain bodhi. They are all created due to sympathetic pity

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
729
for all beings, are all created in order to progress in the quest to
attain the knowledge of all modes, and are all created in order to
develop the Tathāgata’s ten powers.” As he reflects in this way, his
roots of goodness increase and he never retreats.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also reflects in
this way: “Due to the karmic rewards accruing from these roots of
goodness, may I cultivate the bodhisattva practices to the very end
of all future kalpas, kindly giving them all to all beings, dedicat­
ing them all to all beings everywhere without exception. May they
cause an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled with precious jewels, an
asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled with clothing, an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds to be filled with marvelous incense, an asaṃkhyeya of worlds
to be filled with adornments, an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled
with countless maṇi jewels, an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled with
exquisite flowers, an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled with excel­
lent flavors, an asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled with valuables, an
asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled with couches and chairs shaded
with jeweled canopies and covered with marvelous robes, and an
asaṃkhyeya of worlds to be filled with all different kinds of jeweled
crowns with various adornments. Then, even if a single person
always kept coming back until the end of future kalpas, seeking
each time to be given all these things, I would never cease to gra­
ciously give them all to him, and would never weary of doing so.
And just as I would do this for that one person, so too would I also
give them to all other beings in this same way.”
Sons of the Buddha, when this bodhisattva-mahāsattva gives in
this way, he does so with a mind free of falseness, with a mind free
of anything he hopes for, with a mind free of concerns about fame
or reputation, with a mind free of any regrets, and with a mind free
of any irritation. Rather, he would only arouse a mind solely intent
on seeking the path to all-knowledge, a mind willing to relinquish
everything, a mind of heart-felt sympathy for beings, a mind intent
on teaching and ripening them, and a mind intent on enabling them
all to dwell securely in the wisdom of all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, to the very end of all future kalpas, the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all his roots of goodness in this
way, always practicing kindly giving.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also reflects in
these ways:
I wish that, as gifts for a single being, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya
of worlds with precious elephants complete in their seven
parts, well-disciplined by nature, decorated with gold banners,

730

The Flower Adornment Sutra
covered with a gold-mesh caparison, and adorned with all dif­
ferent kinds of exquisite gems;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with precious horses like the king of the dragon horses,
each of them decorated with adornments made of many differ­
ent kinds of jewels;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with female entertainers able to play all different kinds
of marvelous music;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with sons and daughters;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with bodies of mine that had all resolved to attain bodhi;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with my own heads that had all already aroused the
non-neglectful mind;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with my own eyes;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with my own bodies’ blood, flesh, bones, and marrow
even as my mind remained free of any fond attachment to them;
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with the positions of sovereign kings serving as rulers;
and
I wish that, to take to him as gifts, I could fill an asaṃkhyeya of
worlds with servants to serve him.
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva uses many different kinds of gifts
such as these, doing so to the very end of all future kalpas, thus
becoming securely established in the mind intent on vast giving of
everything to all beings, providing such gifts for all beings every­
where in all realms of beings just as he would do so for that one
single being.
Sons of the Buddha, just as, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva
cultivates the bodhisattva practices, he is willing to give gifts such
as these to a single being in a single world to the very end of all
kalpas of the future, so too is he willing to give in this same way
to satisfy all beings in all worlds throughout all of space and the
entire Dharma realm. His great compassion extends everywhere
to them all as he incessantly bestows heartfelt sympathy on them
all and provides offerings to them all in accordance with whatever
they might need. In doing so, he does not allow his practice of giv­
ing to pause due to encountering any particular kinds of conditions.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
731
Rather, it continues on in this manner without him ever feeling any
weariness for even the moment of a finger snap.
Sons of the Buddha, as he performs such giving, the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva brings forth these states of mind, namely: the unat­
tached mind, the unbound mind, the liberated mind, the immensely
powerful mind, the extremely profound mind, the well-focused
mind, the unattached mind, the mind free of any conception of
anyone possessed of a life span, the well-trained mind, the undis­
tracted mind, the mind free of erroneous perceptions, the mind
which possesses the nature of the various jewels,395 the mind that
does not seek karmic rewards, the mind that completely compre­
hends all dharmas, the mind that abides in great dedications, the
mind that is skillful and decisive in comprehending all meanings,
the mind that enables all beings to abide in unexcelled wisdom, the
mind that produces the light of the great Dharma, and the mind
that penetrates the wisdom of all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, in each successive mind-moment, the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all the roots of goodness he has
accumulated, doing so in these ways:
May all beings acquire abundant wealth and jewels and not want
for anything;
May all beings develop an inexhaustibly great treasury of merito­
rious qualities;
May all beings acquire every kind of peaceful security, and hap­
piness;
May all beings increasingly perform the works of the bodhisattva-
mahāsattvas;
May all beings successfully fulfill countless dharmas of utmost
supremacy;
May all beings attain irreversibility in the vehicle leading to all-
knowledge;
May all beings everywhere see all buddhas of the ten directions;
May all beings forever abandon the world’s delusions and defile­
ments;
May all beings acquire the pure and impartial mind; and
May all beings leave behind the difficult rebirth circumstances396
and attain all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes dedi­
cations such as these, he becomes filled with joy, [wishing]:
To enable all beings to acquire benefit and happiness;
To enable all beings to develop impartial minds;

732

The Flower Adornment Sutra
To enable all beings to abide in a mind capable of relinquishing;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind able to give everything;
To enable all beings to abide in a joyfully giving mind;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind of giving that ensures per­
petual freedom from poverty;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that gives away all wealth
and jewels;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that gives away measure­
less wealth and jewels;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that is devoted to universal
giving, measureless giving, and giving everything;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that gives incessantly to the
very end of all future kalpas;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind of giving that relinquishes
everything without regrets or afflictions;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind of giving that relinquishes
all the necessities of life;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that gives in accordance
with circumstances;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that attracts others through
giving;397
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that gives on a vast scale;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that relinquishes countless
adornments as offerings;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that gives without attach­
ment;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind that gives equally to all;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind of giving that is as extremely
strong as vajra;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind of giving that is as bright
as the sun;
To enable all beings to abide in a mind of giving that embraces the
wisdom of the Tathāgata;
To enable all beings to have a retinue fully endowed with roots of
goodness;
To enable all beings to have roots of goodness and wisdom which
always manifest directly before them;
To enable all beings to acquire minds of fully developed and inde­
structible purity;
To enable all beings to perfect the most supremely pure roots of
goodness;
To enable all beings to awaken from the slumber of the afflictions;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
733
To enable all beings to extinguish all doubts;
To enable all beings to acquire the pure meritorious qualities aris­
ing from impartiality and wisdom;
To enable all beings to develop perfectly full and indestructible
meritorious qualities;
To enable all beings to possess pure and unshakable samādhi;
To enable all beings to abide in the indestructible wisdom of all-
knowledge;
To enable all beings to perfect the bodhisattva’s measureless
purity in the practice of the spiritual superknowledges;
To enable all beings to cultivate and accumulate roots of goodness
without attachment;
To enable all beings to bear in mind the purity of mind of all bud­
dhas of the past, future, and present;
To enable all beings to develop pure and excellent roots of good­
ness;
To enable all beings to extinguish all path-obstructing dharmas
which are the works of Māra;
To enable all beings to possess the dharmas producing the merito­
rious qualities of unimpeded purity and impartiality;
To enable all beings to use the vast mind to always practice the
unremitting mindfulness of all buddhas;
To enable all beings to always draw near to the buddhas and be
diligent in making offerings to them;
To enable all beings to open wide the gates to all roots of goodness
and be able to fulfill all the dharmas of pristine purity;
To enable all beings to completely purify the immeasurable minds,
the vast mind, and the most supreme mind;
To enable all beings to perfect the mind of pure and impartial giv­
ing;
To enable all beings to maintain consistent purity in upholding
the śīla pāramitā of all buddhas;
To enable all beings to acquire the pāramitā of great patience;
To enable all beings to abide in the vigor pāramitā and remain for­
ever free of indolence;
To enable all beings to abide in measureless meditative absorp­
tions and become able to produce the many different kinds of
spiritual superknowledges and wisdom;
To enable all beings to acquire the prajñā pāramitā by which they
realize that all dharmas have no essential nature of their own;
To enable all beings to attain complete realization of the infinitely
pure Dharma realm;

734

The Flower Adornment Sutra
To enable all beings to fulfill all spiritual superknowledges and
pure roots of goodness;
To enable all beings to abide in the practice of equanimity and
achieve perfect fulfillment in the accumulation of all good
dharmas;
To enable all beings to skillfully enter the realms of all buddhas
and pervade them all;
To enable all beings to attain complete purity in the actions of
body, mouth, and mind;
To enable all beings to attain complete purity in the karmic
rewards of their good actions;
To enable all beings to fully comprehend the complete purity of
all dharmas;
To enable all beings to fully comprehend the complete purity of
the true meaning;
To enable all beings to attain complete purity in cultivating the
supreme practices;
To enable all beings to accomplish the great vows of all bodhisat­
tvas with complete purity;
To enable all beings to attain complete purity in their realization
of all meritorious qualities and wisdom;
To enable all beings to perfect all the same-substance roots of
goodness398 and then dedicate them to the generation and com­
plete fulfillment of the vehicle leading to all-knowledge;
To enable all beings to achieve the complete fulfillment of the
purification of all buddha lands;
To enable all beings to achieve the complete fulfillment of the abil­
ity to see all buddhas and yet remain free of attachment;
To enable all beings to possess the major marks and secondary
signs as the complete fulfillment of adornment with meritori­
ous qualities;
To enable all beings to acquire the sixty kinds of voices, to speak
words of sincere truth, all of which can be believed and accepted,
to become adorned with the hundred thousand types of dhar­
mas, and to achieve complete fulfillment of the Tathāgata’s
unimpeded meritorious qualities and exquisite voice;
To enable all beings to perfect the unimpeded and equanimous
mind adorned with the ten powers;
To enable all beings to acquire the endless Dharma light of all
buddhas and the complete fulfillment of all forms of eloquence;
To enable all beings to acquire the unexcelled fearlessness and the
lion’s roar of the Hero among Men;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
735
To enable all beings to acquire all-knowledge and turn the irre­
versible wheel of the endless Dharma;
To enable all beings to attain complete fulfillment in fully under­
standing all dharmas and revealing them and expounding on
them for others;
To enable all beings to achieve complete fulfillment in the timely
cultivation of pure and good dharmas;
To enable all beings to attain perfect purity in the unsurpassable
Dharma Jewel equivalent to that achieved by the Master Guide;
To enable all beings to achieve complete fulfillment of a single
adornment, countless adornments, the great adornment, and
the adornments of all buddhas;
To enable all beings to equally enter and go everywhere in all
realms throughout the three periods of time;
To enable all beings to travel to all buddha kṣetras to listen to and
absorb right Dharma, having none of them in which they do not
travel about everywhere;
To enable all beings to develop such wisdom and beneficence that
they become as revered in the world as a buddha;
To enable all beings to know all dharmas with perfectly fulfilled
all-knowledge;
To enable all beings to accomplish the works of unshakable [medi­
tative absorption] and acquire their unimpeded and perfectly
full fruits;
To enable all beings to develop the spiritual superknowledges in
all their faculties399 and become able to know the faculties of all
beings;
To enable all beings to acquire the non-discriminating wisdom
that cognizes the identity [of all dharmas] and their single sign
of all-pervading purity.
To enable all beings to avoid contradicting principles and become
fully endowed with roots of goodness;
To enable all beings to acquire clear and penetrating realization
of sovereign mastery in all the bodhisattva’s spiritual super­
knowledges;
To enable all beings to acquire the endless meritorious qualities
of all buddhas and become equally endowed with merit and
wisdom;
To enable all beings to arouse the resolve to attain bodhi and fully
understand all dharmas are equally possessed of the same sin­
gle sign;
To enable all beings to completely comprehend right Dharma and
become the most supreme fields of merit for the world;

736

The Flower Adornment Sutra
To enable all beings to perfect the impartial and pure great com­
passion and become for all benefactors an immensely potent
field of merit;
To enable all beings to become foremost in steadfastness400 so that
nothing can impede them;
To enable all beings to benefit whoever sees them and never be
defeated in their ability to do so;
To enable all beings to perfect the mind of supreme equanimity;
To enable all beings to become well able to fully comprehend all
dharmas and gain great fearlessness;
To enable all beings to emanate a single ray of light that every­
where illuminates all worlds of the ten directions;
To enable all beings to never retreat from cultivating all bodhisat­
tvas’ practice of vigor;
To enable all beings to fulfill all kinds of conduct and vows
through the practice of but a single kind of conduct and vows;
To enable all beings to use but a single sublime voice to enable all
who hear it to understand;
To enable all beings to become fully possessed of the pure mind
of all bodhisattvas;
To enable all beings to everywhere succeed in meeting and serv­
ing all good spiritual guides;
To enable all beings to incessantly cultivate the bodhisattva prac­
tices and train beings;
To enable all beings to use marvelous eloquence and possess all
voices in adapting to beings as they incessantly and extensively
expound [on the Dharma];
To enable all beings to know all minds with the one mind as they
impartially dedicate their roots of goodness [to them all];
To enable all beings to always delight in accumulating all roots of
goodness and establishing beings in pure wisdom;
To enable all beings to acquire all-knowledge and the pure body
possessed of merit and wisdom;
To enable all beings to thoroughly know the roots of goodness of
all beings and then contemplate and make dedications to ripen
them all;
To enable all beings to acquire all-knowledge and reach the com­
plete fulfillment of the right and perfect enlightenment;
To enable all beings to fully attain the spiritual superknowledges
with which, as they manifest in one place, they manifest in all
places;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
737
To enable all beings to attain the universally adorning wisdom
with which, as they purify a single congregation, they purify
all congregations;
To enable all beings to see all buddha lands in any single buddha
land;
To enable all beings to everywhere adorn all buddha lands with
all adornments, ineffably many adornments, measurelessly
many adornments, and endlessly many adornments;
To enable all beings to attain a decisive understanding of the
extremely profound meaning in all dharmas;
To enable all beings to acquire sovereign mastery of all tathāgatas’
most superior and foremost spiritual superknowledges;
To enable all beings to acquire sovereign mastery of the spiritual
superknowledge in which one manifests as neither one nor
many and possesses all the meritorious qualities;
To enable all beings to fully develop the same roots of goodness
and receive the crown-anointing consecration from all bud­
dhas; and
To enable all beings to achieve the complete fulfillment of the
pure wisdom body and become the most revered of all in all
the realms of existence.
Sons of the Buddha, it is in this way that the bodhisattva-mahāsattva
compassionately and sympathetically benefits and bestows happi­
ness on all beings and enables them all to attain purity, to abandon
miserliness and jealousy, to take on supremely marvelous rebirths,
to possess great awesome virtue, to develop great resolute faith, and
to forever abandon anger and all the vision-obscuring turbidities
so that their minds become purified, they develop straightforward­
ness and pliancy of character, they become free of flattery, devious­
ness, doubts, and delusion, and they adopt the practices leading to
emancipation, doing so with an indestructibly steadfast and equa­
nimous resolve that is forever irreversible, that completely perfects
the power of the dharmas of pristine purity, and that becomes free
of afflictions and faults. He practices skillful dedications, always
cultivates right practice, trains beings, extinguishes all unwhole­
some karma, and cultivates the austere practices and all kinds of
roots of goodness.
He also encourages beings, enables them to cultivate and accu­
mulate [roots of goodness], and everywhere fully takes on the many
kinds of sufferings for sentient beings. Using the eye of great wis­
dom to contemplate their roots of goodness, he realizes they are
naturally possessed of wisdom and then uses skillful means to
make dedications to benefit all beings:

738

The Flower Adornment Sutra
To enable all beings to become securely established in all the bases
of pure meritorious qualities;
To enable all beings to accumulate all roots of goodness and real­
ize the nature and meaning of all the meritorious qualities;
To enable all beings to thoroughly purify all their roots of good­
ness;
To enable all beings to plant all the good dharmas in the realms
of the fields of merit, doing so with a mind that remains free of
regrets in doing so;
To enable all beings to gather in all beings and enable every one of
them to progress toward the realization of all-knowledge; and
To enable all beings to gather together all their roots of goodness
and then dedicate each of them to others impartially and appro­
priately.
He also dedicates all his roots of goodness in these ways: “May all
beings attain ultimate peace and security; may all beings attain
ultimate purity; may all beings attain ultimate happiness; may all
beings attain ultimate liberation; may all beings attain ultimate
equanimity; may all beings attain ultimate complete comprehen­
sion; may all beings become ultimately established in the dharmas
of pristine purity; may all beings acquire the unimpeded eyes; may
all beings skillfully train their own minds; and may all beings fully
possess the ten powers and train beings.”
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
dedications in these ways, he is not attached to karmic works,
is not attached to karmic rewards, is not attached to the body, is
not attached to things, is not attached to kṣetras, is not attached to
regions, is not attached to beings, is not attached to the nonexistence
of beings, is not attached to all dharmas, and is not attached to the
nonexistence of all dharmas.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
dedications in this way, he bestows all these roots of goodness on
the entire world, [reflecting]: “May all beings fully develop the
Buddha’s knowledge, acquire the pure mind, possess completely
clear wisdom, gain inward quiescence of mind, remain unmoved
by outer conditions, and perpetuate and perfect the lineage of all
buddhas of the three periods of time.”
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva cultivates
dedications such as these, he attains such unsurpassably complete
transcendence that even all the world’s words of praise could never
completely describe it. He cultivates all the bodhisattva practices
and becomes unimpeded in his ability to go and visit all buddha

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
739
lands to see all buddhas. He is also able to see everything practiced
by all bodhisattvas in all worlds and uses fine skillful means to dis­
tinguish for beings the extremely profound meaning of statements
about dharmas. He acquires the dhāraṇīs with which he becomes
able to endlessly expound on the sublime Dharma throughout all
kalpas of the future.
In each successive mind-moment, for the sake of beings, he
everywhere manifests his bodies like reflected images in an ineffa­
ble-ineffable number of worlds and makes offerings to all buddhas.
In each successive mind-moment, he brings about the all-pervading
purification of an ineffable-ineffable number of buddha lands. He
insatiably cultivates the wisdom with which he purifies buddha
kṣetras and, in each successive mind-moment, he enables an ineffa­
ble-ineffable number of hundreds of thousands of koṭīs of nayutas of
beings to achieve the perfection of purity and the complete fulfill­
ment of equanimity.
In all those lands, he diligently cultivates all the pāramitās, gath­
ers in beings, and perfects the purification of his karmic deeds. He
acquires the unimpeded ear with which he listens to the turning of
the Dharma wheel as it is turned by each of the tathāgatas in every
one of those ineffable-ineffable number of buddha worlds. He lis­
tens to, accepts, and upholds those teachings in energetically dili­
gent cultivation and never thinks for even a single mind-moment
to abandon them. He abides in the bodhisattva’s spiritual super­
knowledges in which nothing is apprehensible, there is nothing to
rely on, there is nothing that is done, and there are no attachments.
In but a single kṣaṇa or the instant of a finger snap, he is able to issue
division bodies that go everywhere to visit an ineffable number of
buddha worlds in which he shares the same views as all the other
bodhisattvas there.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva culti­
vates the bodhisattva practices in these ways, not only are the inef­
fable-ineffable number of pure meritorious qualities he fulfills such
that, if recalled and eulogized, one could never come to the end of
their praises, this is even more so the case with his attainment of
unexcelled bodhi and his realization of the equality and purity of
all buddha kṣetras, the equality and purity of all beings, the equal­
ity and purity of all bodies, the equality and purity of all faculties,
the equality and purity of all karmic fruits, the equality and purity
of all congregations and sites of enlightenment, the equality and
purity of all perfectly fulfilled practices, the equality and purity of
the expedient knowledge of all dharmas, the equality and purity of

740

The Flower Adornment Sutra
all tathāgatas’ vows and dedications, and the equality and purity of
all buddhas’ spheres of spiritual superknowledges.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
dedications in these ways, he acquires gateways to happiness in
which all qualities are pure and those countless meritorious quali­
ties are fully adorned. When he makes dedications in these ways:
beings do not oppose all kṣetras; kṣetras do not oppose all beings;
kṣetras and beings do not oppose karmic deeds; karmic deeds do
not oppose kṣetras and beings; thought does not oppose mind;
mind does not oppose thought; thought and mind do not oppose
realms; realms do not oppose thought and mind; karmic deeds do
not oppose karmic retribution; karmic retribution does not oppose
karmic deeds; karmic deeds do not oppose courses of karmic action;
karmic actions do not oppose karmic deeds; the nature of dharmas
does not oppose their marks; the marks of dharmas do not oppose
their nature; the arising of dharmas does not oppose their nature;
the nature of dharmas does not oppose their arising; the equality
of kṣetras does not oppose the equality of beings; the equality of
beings does not oppose the equality of kṣetras; the equality of all
beings does not oppose the equality of all dharmas; the equality of
all dharmas does not oppose the equality of all beings; the equal­
ity of the epitome of dispassion does not oppose the equality of all
beings’ establishment; the equality of all beings’ establishment does
not oppose the epitome of dispassion; the past does not oppose the
future; the future does not oppose the past; the past and the future
do not oppose the present; the present does not oppose the past
and the future; the equality of time does not oppose the equality of
buddhas; the equality of buddhas does not oppose the equality of
time; the bodhisattva practices do not oppose all-knowledge; and
all-knowledge does not oppose the bodhisattva practices.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
dedications in these ways, he realizes the equality of karmic deeds,
the equality of karmic retributions, the equality of bodies, the equal­
ity of skillful means, the equality of vows, the equality of all beings,
the equality of all kṣetras, the equality of all practices, the equality of
all knowledge, and the equality of all buddhas of the three periods
of time as he is also able to serve all buddhas, able to make offerings
to all bodhisattvas, able to plant all roots of goodness, able to fulfill
all great vows, able to teach all beings, able to fully know all karmic
deeds, able to serve and make offerings to all good spiritual guides,
able to enter all pure congregations and sites of enlightenment, able
to reach a penetrating comprehension of all right teachings, and
able to fulfill all the dharmas of pristine purity.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
741
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s seventh dedication, the dedication that equally
accords with all beings. If the bodhisattva-mahāsattva perfects this
dedication, then:401
He is able to vanquish all demon adversaries and extricate all the
thorns of desire;
He acquires the bliss of emancipation and dwells in the non-dual
nature;
He possesses great awesome virtue and rescues and protects
beings;
He becomes a king of meritorious qualities with the unimpeded
capacity for psycho-physical travel;
He travels to all kṣetras and enters the station of quiescence;
He possesses all the bodies,402 perfects the bodhisattva conduct,
and attains sovereign mastery of mind in all the practices and
vows;
He clearly distinguishes and fully knows all dharmas and is able
to take births everywhere in all buddha kṣetras;
He acquires the unimpeded ear, hears all the sounds in all kṣetras,
acquires the pure wisdom eye, sees all buddhas, and never
leaves them even briefly; and
He perfects the roots of goodness in all spheres of experience,
becomes free of any mental conception of high or low, and real­
izes the inapprehensibility of all dharmas.
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva equally accords with all beings as he
dedicates all roots of goodness in these ways.
At that time, aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Vajra Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
All of the merit created by the bodhisattva
is sublime, vast, extremely deep, and far-reaching.
Even what he cultivates in but a single mind-moment,
he is able to dedicate boundlessly.
All the life-supporting possessions owned by the bodhisattva
are of all different kinds, abundant, and are limitless koṭīs in number.
His perfumed elephants and precious horses harnessed to carriages
as well as his clothing, gems, and wealth are all especially marvelous.
He may give his head, his eyes, or his hands and feet,
or may offer up his body, its flesh or its bones and marrow.
They all pervade the countless kṣetras of the ten directions
as he gives them to all, causing them to become present everywhere.
As he dedicates all the merit he cultivates
throughout the course of countless kalpas,

742

The Flower Adornment Sutra
wishing to rescue and liberate all the many kinds of beings,
his mind still never retreats from this resolve.
In order to liberate beings, the bodhisattva
always cultivates the most excellent acts of dedication,
everywhere enabling those in the three realms to be happy,
empowering them all to realize the unexcelled fruition.
The bodhisattva everywhere makes the impartial vow
to dedicate to all the many kinds of beings
whatever pure deeds he ever accumulates.
He then never relinquishes such a great vow.
The vow power of the bodhisattva is limitless and unimpeded.
He includes within it everyone in all worlds.
As he makes such dedications for all the many kinds of beings,
he never for even a moment discriminates among them.
He vows to enable all beings to attain wisdom that is completely clear
giving and observance of moral precepts, all of which are pure,
and vigorous cultivation which never becomes indolent.
Such great vows as these they never allow to lapse.
The bodhisattva’s dedications reach the far shore of perfection
and everywhere open the gates to the pure and marvelous Dharma.
His wisdom matches that of the Most Honored of All Bipeds403
and his discernment of the genuine meaning reaches the ultimate.
The bodhisattva has already mastered eloquence in verbal expression.
So too is this true of his various ways of expressing wisdom.
He is unimpeded in teaching the Dharma in accordance with principle
and as he does so his mind remains unattached.
He always refrains from establishing dualities regarding any dharmas
even as he also refrains from establishing non-duality, either,
for he has transcended both duality and non-duality
and realizes these are all simply functions of the pathway of words.
He realizes that all worlds are the same
in that none are not produced by the mind, speech, and all actions,
that beings themselves are illusory conjurations devoid of reality,
and all karmic rewards and retributions arise entirely from this.
Throughout all worlds,
all the various karmic rewards and retributions differ,
yet none of them are not in all cases produced by the power of karma.
Hence, if one extinguishes karma, then they all are brought to an end.
As the bodhisattva contemplates all worlds, [he sees that]
the karma of body, mouth, and mind are all the same

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
743
and also observes that beings abide in this same equality,
just as does the peerless Honored One among the Great Āryas.404
The bodhisattva dedicates all of his good karma
to enable all beings to acquire the pure form body
and become fully possessed of merit and skillful means,
the same as the unsurpassed Tamer of Men to Be Tamed.405
The bodhisattva benefits all the many types of beings
and dedicates all of his great ocean of merit,
wishing to enable them to have awesome radiance rare in the world
and then attain the body possessed of courage and great powers.
With whatever merit he cultivates,
he wishes to enable the world to become entirely pure
so that the purity of beings will come to be like
the matchless purity of the buddhas.
The bodhisattva becomes skilled in interpreting meanings
and is thus able to know the most supreme dharmas of all buddhas.
He dedicates impartially his many good works,
vowing to enable common beings to be the same as the Tathāgata.
The bodhisattva fully realizes that all dharmas are empty,
that all worlds are entirely nonexistent,
that nothing is created, and that there is no creator,
even as beings’ karmic retributions are nonetheless still never lost.
As for whether dharmas are quiescent or not quiescent,
he abandons these duality-based discriminating thoughts,
realizes that all these discriminations are but worldly views,
and enters the right [and fixed] position406 where discriminations end.
Such a genuine son of the buddha as this
has been transformationally born from the Tathāgata’s Dharma.
He is able to carry out such fine dedications as these
and extinguish all the doubts of those in the world.
Sons of the Buddha, what is the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedica­
tion that has the character of true suchness? Sons of the Buddha,
here the bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides in completely clear right
mindfulness with a solidly abiding resolve. Having abandoned
delusion, he single-mindedly cultivates with a deep and unmov­
ing mind, establishes himself in indestructible karmic works, pro­
gresses toward all-knowledge, and remains forever irreversible in
his resolute pursuit of the Great Vehicle as, with courage and fear­
lessness, he plants the roots of every kind of virtue. He everywhere
brings peace to the world, produces supreme roots of goodness,

744

The Flower Adornment Sutra
cultivates the dharmas of pristine purity, increases in his great
compassion, and perfects the jewel of the mind. Ever mindful of all
buddhas, he protects and preserves right Dharma and maintains
solid and resolute faith in the bodhisattva path. He perfects count­
less pure and sublime roots of goodness, diligently cultivates every
kind of merit and wisdom, becomes a tamer of those to be tamed,
develops the many kinds of good dharmas, and uses wisdom and
skillful means in making dedications.
At this time, using the wisdom eye, the bodhisattva everywhere
contemplates all the measureless and boundless roots of goodness.
When cultivating and accumulating them, this may involve the pur­
suit of conditions, the preparation of resources, purification, obtain­
ing entry, focused encouragement, initiation of practices, clear com­
prehension, thorough investigation, or explanations. All matters
such as these in turn involve various methods, various objective
circumstances, various characteristic features, various phenomena,
various categories, various practices, various designations, various
distinctions, various means of production, or various methods of
cultivation.
All of these roots of goodness are established by the resolve to
progress toward success in the vehicle of the ten powers and all
of them are dedicated toward gaining the knowledge of all modes,
for there is only one [vehicle.] There are not two.407 He dedicates all
these roots of goodness in these ways:
Vowing to achieve the complete fulfillment of unimpeded physi­
cal karma in cultivating the bodhisattva practices;
Vowing to attain pure and unimpeded verbal karma in cultivat­
ing the bodhisattva practices;
Vowing to perfect unimpeded mental karma in becoming estab­
lished in the Great Vehicle;
Vowing to attain the complete fulfillment of unimpeded resolve
in purely cultivating all the bodhisattva practices;
Vowing to arouse the measurelessly vast resolve to practice giving
and provide assistance to all the boundlessly many beings;
Vowing to gain sovereign mastery of mind in all dharmas and
expound the great light of Dharma which no one can conceal;
Vowing to clearly comprehend the bases of all-knowledge and
arouse the bodhi resolve to entirely illuminate the world;
Vowing to always maintain right mindfulness of all buddhas of
the three periods of time and truly visualize the Tathāgata as
appearing directly before him;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
745
Vowing to abide in fully developed and especially supreme aspi­
ration with which he leaves behind all māras and other such
adversaries;
Vowing to become established in the wisdom of the Buddha’s ten
powers and never cease to everywhere gather in beings;
Vowing to gain samādhis and roam to all worlds and yet remain
free of defiling attachments to the world;
Vowing to tirelessly dwell in all worlds, incessantly teaching
beings;
Vowing to produce countless skillful means to implement con­
templative wisdom and perfect the inconceivable path of the
bodhisattva;
Vowing to acquire the wisdom with which he remains undeluded
everywhere and is able to clearly distinguish all worlds;
Vowing to gain sovereign mastery in the power of the spiritual
superknowledges with which, in but a single mind-moment, he
is able to purify all lands;
Vowing to be able to penetrate the essential nature of all dharmas
and perceive the purity of all worlds;
Vowing to succeed in generating non-discriminating wisdom
with which he enters all kṣetras in any single kṣetra;
Vowing to use the adornments in all kṣetras to reveal everything
and thereby teach countlessly and boundlessly many beings;
Vowing to reveal the boundless Dharma realm in a single buddha
kṣetra and also do the same thing in all buddha kṣetras; and
Vowing to gain sovereign mastery in the great spiritual super­
knowledges and become able to go and visit all buddha lands.
Sons of the Buddha, using all such roots of goodness, the
bodhisattva-mahāsattva vows to be able to adorn all buddha lands,
vows to be able to go everywhere throughout all worlds, and vows
to be able to perfect wisdom-based contemplations. And just as he
makes dedications such as these for himself, so too does he do so for
all beings, [thinking]:
May all beings forever abandon all the rebirth destinies of the hell
realms, the animal realms, and the realm of King Yama;
May all beings extinguish all karma that produces obstacles;
May all beings attain the equanimity and wisdom of the universal
mind;
May all beings accept both adversaries and friends with even-
minded impartiality and enable them all to become happy and
possess pure wisdom;

746

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings acquire perfectly full wisdom and its universally
illuminating pure light;
May all beings acquire fully developed contemplative wisdom
and completely understand the meaning of reality;
May all beings be able to progress with pure aspiration in their
quest to attain bodhi and gain measureless wisdom; and
May all beings become everywhere able to reveal the peaceful and
secure dwelling place.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva constantly uses
the wholesome mind to make dedications in these ways, doing so:
To enable all beings to encounter the clouds of clarity and cool­
ness which pour down the rain of Dharma;
To enable all beings to always encounter fields of merit and excel­
lent spheres of experience;
To enable all beings to skillfully enter the treasury of the bodhi
resolve and then preserve and protect it themselves;
To enable all beings to abandon the hindrances and the manifest
afflictions408 and thus skillfully abide in peace;
To enable all beings to acquire unimpeded spiritual superknowl­
edges and wisdom;
To enable all beings to acquire the body possessed of the sover­
eign masteries with which they appear everywhere;
To enable all beings to perfect the most excellent knowledge of all
modes and never fail to be successful in benefiting others;
To enable all beings to gather in the many classes of beings and
enable them to attain purity;
To enable all beings to gain the ultimate realization of all-knowl­
edge; and
To enable all beings to gain an unshakable mind free of all obsta­
cles.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva may see delight­
ful lands, parks and groves, plants and trees, flowers and fruit,
fine incense, excellent clothing, precious jewels, material wealth,
and all kinds of adornments. He may see delightful towns and vil­
lages, may see monarchs possessed of sovereign powers, or may
see dwelling places free from clamorous disturbances. Having seen
such things, he uses his knowledge of skillful means to cultivate
with intense diligence and produce countless supremely marvel­
ous meritorious qualities with which to seek good dharmas for all
beings, never being neglectful as he extensively accumulates many
different kinds of fine things as vast as an ocean.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
747
Using such endless goodness to benefit everyone and become a
source of the many different kinds of good dharmas, he uses skillful
means to dedicate all these roots of goodness without discriminat­
ing. He instructs others in the creation of countless roots of good­
ness of all different kinds and, with wisdom, always contemplates
all beings, constantly bearing in mind the objective circumstances
of their roots of goodness. With impartiality comparable to that of
true suchness, he incessantly dedicates these roots of goodness for
beings. The bodhisattva then dedicates all these roots of goodness
in these ways:
May all beings acquire the delightful vision of all tathāgatas with
which they see the uniformly equal true nature of dharmas
without attachment and with complete purity;
May all beings see all the tathāgatas as extremely delightful and
present perfectly full offerings to them;
May all beings be reborn in all the extremely delightful and pure
buddha kṣetras, free of all afflictions;
May all beings be able to see all buddhas [and hear] their delight­
ful Dharma;
May all beings always delight in protecting and preserving the
delightful practices of all bodhisattvas;
May all beings acquire the delightful eyes of the good spiritual
guides and see with unimpeded vision;
May all beings always see all delightful things and not see any­
thing that is offensive;
May all beings realize all delightful dharmas and then diligently
protect and preserve them;
May all beings acquire the pure light of all buddhas’ delightful
dharmas;
May all beings cultivate the delightful mind of all bodhisattvas
that is able to relinquish everything;
May all beings acquire the fearlessnesses and become able to teach
all the delightful dharmas;
May all beings acquire all bodhisattvas’ extremely delightful and
extremely deep samādhis;
May all beings acquire all bodhisattvas’ extremely delightful
dhāraṇī gateways;
May all beings acquire all bodhisattvas’ extremely delightful
skillfulness in contemplative wisdom;
May all beings become able to manifest the bodhisattva’s extremely
delightful sovereign mastery in the spiritual superknowledges;

748

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings become able to expound on the delightful,
extremely profound, and sublime Dharma in the great congre­
gations of all buddhas;
May all beings become able to use skillful means to reveal and
expound on the extremely delightful different statements [in
the Dharma];
May all beings always be able to arouse extremely delightful and
impartial great compassion;
May all beings arouse the extremely delightful great bodhi resolve
in each successive mind-moment and thus always enable all
their faculties to feel blissfully pleased;
May all beings become able to enter the extremely delightful fam­
ily of all tathāgatas;
May all beings acquire the delightful practice by which they are
able to train others and then proceed to incessantly train beings;
May all beings acquire all bodhisattvas’ extremely delightful and
inexhaustible eloquence and then expound on all dharmas;
May all beings dwell in all delightful worlds for an ineffable-inef­
fable number of kalpas, tirelessly teaching beings;
May all beings use countless skillful means to be able to awaken
to and enter all the extremely delightful Dharma gateways of
all buddhas;
May all beings acquire the delightful unimpeded skillful means
by which they realize all dharmas have no fundamental bases;
May all beings reach the delightful apex of dispassion and realize
that all dharmas are ultimately non-dual, thereby cutting of all
obstacles;
May all beings reach the delightful apex of dispassion and realize
that all dharmas are all equally real;
May all beings attain the complete fulfillment of all bodhisattva’s
extremely delightful freedom from conceptual proliferation;
May all beings gain the resolve that serves as a vajra treasury of
vigor and then successfully complete the delightful path to all-
knowledge;
May all beings possess the delightful unimpeded roots of good­
ness and vanquish all their affliction adversaries; and
May all beings acquire the delightful gateway to all-knowledge
and manifest the realization of right enlightenment every­
where throughout the world.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva cultivates
roots of goodness such as these:
He gains the light of wisdom;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
749
He is accepted by a good spiritual guide;
His mind is brightly illuminated by the Tathāgata’s wisdom sun
which forever extinguishes the darkness of delusion;
He diligently cultivates right Dharma;
He enters all the works of wisdom;
He skillfully trains in the wisdom grounds;
He spreads his roots of goodness throughout the Dharma realm;
He dedicates his wisdom to reaching the source of all bodhisat­
tvas’ roots of goodness;
He uses wisdom to deeply enter the ocean of great skillful means;
and
He perfects countless vast roots of goodness.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva then dedicates
these roots of goodness in these ways:
He does not become attached to the world;
He does not seize on [the existence of] beings;
His mind is pure;
He does not depend on anything;
He maintains right mindfulness of dharmas;
He abandons discriminating views;
He does not depart from the sovereign wisdom of all buddhas;
He does not oppose the methods of right dedication of all bud­
dhas of the three periods of time;
He accords with all impartial practice of right Dharma;
He does not contradict the true characteristics of the Tathāgata;
He contemplates all three periods of time as equally devoid of any
sign of the existence of any being;
He skillfully accords with the path to buddhahood;
He skillfully teaches the Dharma;
He deeply fathoms its meaning;
He enters the most supreme ground;
He awakens to the genuine Dharma;
His wisdom is complete;
His resolute faith is steadfast;
Although he skillfully cultivates right karma, he still realizes that
by nature karma is empty [of inherent existence];
He completely understands that all dharmas are like illusory con­
jurations;
He realizes that all dharmas are devoid of any inherently existent
nature;

750

The Flower Adornment Sutra
In contemplating all concepts and the various practices, he accords
with the world’s conventional designations and discourse and
yet he is free of any attachment to them;
He extinguishes all causes and conditions leading to attachment;
He understands principles in accordance with reality;
He contemplates the nature of all dharmas as quiescent;
He completely understands that all dharmas have the same single
true character;
He realizes that the characteristics of all dharmas are not mutu­
ally contradictory;
He dwells together with bodhisattvas and cultivates their path;
He skillfully gathers in beings;
He enters the methods of dedication practiced by all bodhisattvas
of the past, the future, and the present;
His mind is not frightened by any dharmas of the Buddha;
With the immeasurable minds, he enables all beings to attain
purity;
He does not arouse any thought of attachment to a self or the pos­
sessions of a self anywhere in the worlds of the ten directions;
He is free of any discriminations regarding anything in the world;
He does not develop any defiled attachment to any spheres of
experience;
He diligently cultivates all world-transcending dharmas;
He does not seize on anything or depend on anything anywhere
in the world;
He maintains solidly enduring right views regarding the pro­
found and sublime path;
He abandons all false views; and
He completely understands the genuine Dharma.
Just as true suchness is boundlessly pervasive, so too it is with [the
bodhisattva’s] dedications of roots of goodness, for they are bound­
lessly pervasive;
Just as true suchness has reality as its nature, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they have his understanding of
this reality in all dharmas as their nature;
Just as true suchness constantly preserves its original nature
without changing, so too it is with his dedications of roots of good­
ness, for they preserve their original nature without ever changing;
Just as true suchness has all dharmas’ absence of any inherent
nature as its nature, so too it is with his dedications of roots of good­
ness, for they have his understanding of all dharmas’ absence of
any inherent nature as their nature;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
751
Just as true suchness is characterized by signlessness, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are characterized
by his understanding of the signlessness of all dharmas;
Just those who realize true suchness are forever irreversible,
so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for whoever
receives them never retreats from the Dharma of all buddhas;
Just as true suchness is where all buddhas act, so too it is with
his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are where all tathāgatas
act;
Just as true suchness takes the transcendence of all signs of any
objective sphere as its objective sphere, so too it is with his ded­
ications of roots of goodness, for they transcend all signs of any
objective sphere and yet constitute the perfectly complete objective
sphere of all buddhas of the three periods of time;
Just as true suchness is able to have that which it establishes, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are all
able to establish all beings;
Just as true suchness by nature always adapts, so too it is with
his dedications of roots of goodness, for they incessantly adapt even
until the end of all future kalpas;
Just as true suchness is measureless, so too it is with his dedica­
tions of roots of goodness, for they, being commensurate with the
realm of empty space, could never be measured by any being;
Just as true suchness pervades everything, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for, in but a single kṣaṇa, they per­
vade the entire Dharma realm;
Just as true suchness always abides and is inexhaustible, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are ultimately
endless;
Just as true suchness is beyond compare, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they are beyond compare in
being everywhere able to fulfill all dharmas of the Buddha;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is stable, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they have a stable
essential nature that neither delusions nor afflictions can ruin;
Just as true suchness is indestructible, so too it is with his dedi­
cations of roots of goodness, for they cannot be damaged by any
being;
Just as the essence of true suchness is shining light, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they have pervasively
shining light as their nature;

752

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Just as true suchness has no place where it does not reside, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they have no place
they do not reside;
Just as true suchness pervades all times, so too it is with his dedi­
cations of roots of goodness, for they pervade all times;
Just as it is the nature of true suchness to always be pure, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they abide in the
world and yet they are still essentially pure;
Just as true suchness is unimpeded by dharmas, so too it is with
his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are unimpeded in
reaching everywhere;
Just as true suchness is the Dharma eye of the multitude, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are able to
serve as the eyes for all beings;
Just as true suchness by nature is free of weariness, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for, as he cultivates all the
bodhisattva practices, he remains forever free of weariness;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is extremely deep, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for their nature is
extremely deep;
Just as true suchness does not contain even a single thing, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for he fully realizes
that, by their very nature, they do not contain even a single thing;
Just as the nature of true suchness is not manifestly apparent, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for their essence
is sublime and difficult to perceive;
Just as true suchness transcends the many obscurations of the
defilements, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness,
for his purified wisdom eye transcends all obscurations by delu­
sion;
Just as true suchness has nothing that compares to it, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for his perfection of all
the bodhisattva practices is most excellent and incomparable;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is quiescence, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are well able
to accord with the dharma of quiescence;
Just as true suchness has no basis, so too it is with his dedica­
tions of roots of goodness, for they are able to penetrate all baseless
dharmas;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is boundless, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they purify beings
whose numbers are boundless;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
753
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is free of attachment,
so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they ulti­
mately leave all attachments behind;
Just as true suchness is free of obstructions, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they extinguish all the world’s
obstructions;
Just as true suchness is not a sphere in which those in the world
can act, so to it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they
are not something that those in the world can implement;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness has no abiding,
so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for there is
nowhere in saṃsāra in which they dwell;
Just as true suchness by nature has nothing that it does, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they leave behind
all endeavors;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness securely abides, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they securely
abide in reality;
Just as true suchness is directly related with all dharmas, so too
it is with his roots of goodness, for they are directly related to the
learning and cultivation of all bodhisattvas;
Just as true suchness by nature is equally present in all dharmas,
so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are
equally cultivated throughout all worlds;
Just as true suchness is never separate from all dharmas, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for, even to the end of
future time, they never abandon the world;
Just as true suchness is ultimately endlessly present in all dhar­
mas, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they
are endlessly dedicated to all beings;
Just as true suchness is unopposed to any dharmas, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they do not oppose
any of the dharmas of all buddhas of the three periods of time;
Just as true suchness comprehensively includes all dharmas, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they com­
pletely include the roots of goodness of all beings;
Just as true suchness shares the same essential nature with all
dharmas, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for
they share the same single essential nature with all buddhas of the
three periods of time;
Just as true suchness never separates from all dharmas, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they include all
worldly and world-transcending dharmas;

754

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Just as true suchness cannot be outshone by anything, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they cannot be out­
shone by anything in any world;
Just as true suchness is unshakable, so too it is with his dedica­
tions of roots of goodness, for they cannot be shaken by any of the
works of the māras;
Just as true suchness is free of the turbidity of the defilements, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they cultivate
the bodhisattva practices without any of the turbidity of the defile­
ments;
Just as true suchness is unchanging, so too it is with his dedica­
tions of roots of goodness, for, with unchanging resolve, they are
sympathetically mindful of beings;
Just as true suchness is inexhaustible, so too it is with his dedica­
tions of roots of goodness, for they cannot be exhausted even by all
worldly dharmas;
Just as true suchness by nature is always awakened, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable the awak­
ening to all dharmas;
Just as true suchness can never be lost, so too it is with his dedi­
cations of roots of goodness, for they arouse the great resolve for
beings which is never lost;
Just as true suchness is able to produce great illumination, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they illuminate all
worlds with the light of great wisdom;
Just as true suchness cannot be described in words, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they cannot be
described by any words;
Just as true suchness sustains all worlds, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they are able to sustain all the
bodhisattva practices;
Just as true suchness accords with worldly discourse, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they accord with all
discourse arising from wisdom;
Just as true suchness pervades all dharmas, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they pervade all buddha kṣetras
of the ten directions, manifest great spiritual superknowledges, and
bring about the right and perfect enlightenment;
Just as true suchness is free of discriminations, so too it is with
his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are free of any dis­
criminations with regard to anything in the entire world;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
755
Just as true suchness pervades all bodies, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they pervade the countless
bodies throughout the kṣetras of the ten directions;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is unproduced, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they manifest
the appearance of production as a skillful means even as they are
unproduced;
Just as true suchness has no place it does not reside, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they manifest spiri­
tual superknowledges throughout the buddha lands of the ten
directions and the three periods of time and thus have no place
they do not reside;
Just as true suchness pervades the nighttime, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they emanate great radiance
into every nighttime as they carry out the works of the Buddha;
Just as true suchness pervades the daytime, so too it is with
his dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable all beings of
the daytime to witness the Buddha’s spiritual transformations, his
expounding on the irreversible wheel of Dharma, and his immacu­
late purity, all without having done so in vain.
Just as true suchness pervades all places during both the half-
moon and full-moon periods, so too it is with his dedications of
roots of goodness, for, in all worlds and in all the sequential time
periods, he uses skillful expedients to know all times in but a single
mind-moment;
Just as true suchness is pervasive throughout the years, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for, abiding for count­
less kalpas, they fully understand and ripen all faculties, enabling
them all to reach perfect fulfillment;
Just as true suchness pervades the kalpas of creation and
destruction, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness,
for they abide in all kalpas, pure and undefiled, teaching beings and
enabling the purification of them all;
Just as true suchness lasts to the very end of the future, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they last to the end
of future time as he cultivates all the pure and marvelous practices
of all bodhisattvas and never retreats from fulfilling his great vows;
Just as true suchness pervasively abides throughout the three
periods of time, so too it is with his dedications of roots of good­
ness, for, in but a single kṣaṇa, they enable all beings to see the bud­
dhas of the three periods of time and then never leave them for even
a single mind-moment;

756

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Just as true suchness pervades all places, so too it is with his ded­
ications of roots of goodness, for they transcend the three realms of
existence, reach everywhere, and enable sovereign mastery in all
things;
Just as true suchness abides in both existent and nonexistent
dharmas, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for
they fully penetrate the ultimate purity of all existent and nonexis­
tent dharmas;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is pure, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they are able to use
skillful means to accumulate the dharmas of the aids to enlighten­
ment and purify all the bodhisattva practices;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is radiantly immacu­
late, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they
enable all bodhisattvas to acquire the radiantly immaculate mind
of samādhi;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is free of defilement,
so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they aban­
don all defilement and completely fulfill all pure intentions;
Just as true suchness is devoid of any self or possessions of a self,
so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they fill all
buddha lands of the ten directions with a pure mind free of a self or
possessions of a self;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is impartial, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they bring about
the attainment of the impartial wisdom of all-knowledge that com­
pletely illuminates all dharmas and abandons all the cataracts of
delusion;
Just as true suchness transcends all measurement, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they abide together
with the immensely powerful measurement-transcending Dharma
treasury of the vehicle of all-knowledge and spread the vast rain
cloud of Dharma throughout all worlds of the ten directions;
Just as true suchness securely abides in uniform equality, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they initiate
all the bodhisattva practices and equally abide in the path of all-
knowledge;
Just as true suchness pervasively abides throughout all realms of
beings, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they
bring about the complete fulfillment of the unimpeded knowledge
of all modes and appear before all those throughout all realms of
beings;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
757
Just as true suchness remains free of all discriminations even as
it everywhere abides in the knowledge of all sounds, so too it is with
his dedications of roots of goodness, for they possess the knowl­
edge of all speech and are able to everywhere manifest all different
kinds of speech to provide instruction to beings;
Just as true suchness forever transcends the world, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they everywhere
enable beings to forever transcend the world;
Just as the nature of true suchness is vast, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they are able to absorb and
preserve all the vast Dharma of the buddhas of the past, the future,
and the present and never forget them as they enable the diligent
cultivation of the practices of all bodhisattvas;
Just as true suchness never rests for even a moment, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for, wishing to establish
all beings on the ground of great wisdom, they incessantly enable
cultivation of the bodhisattva practices throughout all kalpas;
Just as true suchness is so vast that it pervades all dharmas, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for, with unim­
peded pure mindfulness, they everywhere include all the vast gate­
ways into the Dharma;
Just as true suchness comprehensively includes all the many dif­
ferent classes of beings, so too it is with his dedications of roots of
goodness, for they enable the realization of the countless different
varieties of wisdom and the cultivation of the genuine and marvel­
ous practices of all bodhisattvas;
Just as true suchness has nothing it seizes on or becomes attached
to, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they
enable beings to become free of any seizing on any dharmas and
extinguish all attachments in all worlds, thereby enabling them all
to become purified;
Just as the essential nature of true suchness is unmoving, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable estab­
lishment in the ultimate motionlessness of the perfectly fulfilled
conduct and vows of Samantabhadra;
Just as true suchness is the sphere of experience of the Buddha,
so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable
all beings to fulfill all spheres of experience of great wisdom and
extinguish afflicted spheres of experience, thereby causing them all
to be purified;
Just as true suchness cannot be controlled or restrained by any­
one, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they

758

The Flower Adornment Sutra
cannot be restrained or controlled by any of the works of the many
māras or by the erroneous doctrines of non-Buddhist paths;
Just as true suchness is not something that can be cultivated or
not cultivated, so too it is with his dedications of roots of good­
ness, for they enable the abandoning of all discursive thinking and
attachment without making any discriminations about cultivating
or not cultivating;
Just as true suchness does not retreat from anything at all, so
too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they always
[enable beings to] see the buddhas, make the vow to attain bodhi,
and produce the adornment of the great vows from which they
never retreat;
Just as true suchness contains the speech of all worlds, so too it
is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable beings
to develop the spiritual superknowledges and wisdom with which
they acquire all different kinds of speech and utter all the various
kinds of languages;
Just as true suchness has nothing it seeks in any dharmas, so too
it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable all
beings to enter the vehicle of Samantabhadra and gain the emanci­
pation by which they become free of any craving for anything at all;
Just as true suchness abides on all grounds, so too it is with his
dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable all beings to aban­
don all worldly grounds, dwell on the wisdom grounds, and adorn
themselves with the conduct of Samantabhadra;
Just as true suchness is never cut off, so too it is with his dedica­
tions of roots of goodness, for they [enable beings] to gain fearless­
ness in all dharmas, adapt to the speech of all classes of beings, and
ceaselessly expound on the Dharma in place after place;
Just as true suchness abandons all the contaminants, so too it is
with his dedications of roots of goodness, for they enable all beings
to perfect the dharma knowledge by which they completely com­
prehend dharmas and fully develop the uncontaminated meritori­
ous qualities of bodhi;
Just as true suchness does not have even the slightest thing that
can so damage or disturb it that it could become even slightly unen­
lightened, so too it is with his dedications of roots of goodness, for
they everywhere enable beings to awaken to all dharmas with a
measureless mind that pervades the Dharma realm;
Just as true suchness has no beginning point in the past, no end
point in the future, and no difference in the present, so too it is with
his dedications of roots of goodness which, for beings, constantly

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
759
instigate the ever-renewed arising of the vow to attain bodhi,
thereby everywhere enabling purification and the eternal transcen­
dence of saṃsāra;
Just as true suchness has nothing that it discriminates anywhere
in the three periods of time, so too it is with his dedications of roots
of goodness, for, in each successive mind-moment of the present,
the mind is always awakened and, in the past and the future, it is
pure;
Just as true suchness brings about the complete perfection of all
buddhas and bodhisattvas, so too it is with his dedications of roots
of goodness, for they enable the arising of all great vows and skill­
ful means as well as the complete realization of the vast wisdom of
all buddhas; and
Just as true suchness is ultimately pure and does not coexist
with any afflictions, so too it is with the bodhisattva’s dedications of
roots of goodness, for they are able to extinguish all beings’ afflic­
tions and bring about the perfect fulfillment of all forms of pure
wisdom.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes dedi­
cations such as these:
He realizes the equality of all buddha kṣetras through purifying
all worlds;
He realizes the equality of all beings through turning the unim­
peded wheel of Dharma for them;
He realizes the equality of all bodhisattvas through making all
the vows leading to all-knowledge;
He realizes the equality of all buddhas through contemplating the
non-duality of the essential nature of all buddhas;
He realizes the equality of all dharmas through understanding
that the nature of all dharmas is unchanging;
He realizes the equality of all worlds through using the knowl­
edge of expedients to thoroughly understand all the paths of
words;
He realizes the equality of all bodhisattva practices through dedi­
cating all the roots of goodness he plants;
He realizes the equality of all times through always diligently and
incessantly cultivating the Buddha’s works;
He realizes the equality of all karmic effects through staying free
of defiling attachment to any worldly or world-transcending
roots of goodness as he brings them all to completion; and
He realizes the equality of all buddhas’ masterful spiritual super­
knowledges through adapting to the world as he manifests the
Buddha’s works.

760

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s eighth dedication, the dedication that has the charac­
ter of true suchness. When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides in
this dedication:
He realizes countless pure Dharma gateways and becomes able to
roar the Tathāgata’s great lion’s roar freely and fearlessly;
He uses excellent skillful means to always teach and ripen count­
less bodhisattvas without ever resting;
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect body in which
a single body completely pervades all worlds;
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect voice in which
a single voice awakens all beings;
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect powers in
which a single pore is able to contain all worlds;
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect spiritual super­
knowledges in which he places all beings into a single atom;
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect liberations in
which the realms of all buddhas and their realization of the
right and perfect enlightenment are revealed within the body
of a single being;
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect samādhis in
which he is able to reveal all samādhis in a single samādhi;
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect eloquence in
which, in explaining a single sentence of Dharma, he is able to
continue to the end of future time and still never exhaust its
meanings, thereby ridding all beings of their doubts and delu­
sions; and
He acquires the Buddha’s measureless and perfect being replete
with the Buddha’s ten powers and manifests the realization of
right enlightenment in all realms of beings.
Sons of the Buddha, this is the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedication
of all roots of goodness in accord with the character of true such­
ness.
At that time, aided by the Buddha’s awesome powers, Vajra Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
The bodhisattva’s determination is always securely abiding
and his right mindfulness is steadfast and free of delusions.
His mind is virtuous, pliant, and constantly clear and cool
as he accumulates practices creating boundless meritorious qualities.
The bodhisattva is humble, compliant, free of contrariness,
and all his aspirations are pure.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
761
He has already acquired the great light of wisdom
and he is well able to completely illuminate all karmic actions.
The bodhisattva’s works performed in meditation are vast,
of many different kinds, and extremely rare.
His resolute intentions in cultivation are irreversible
and in this way he benefits the many kinds of beings.
The works he performs are different and of countless varieties.
The bodhisattva diligently cultivates them all.
Adapting to beings and not opposing their wishes,
he enables them all to attain purity of mind and become joyful.
He has already ascended to the ground of the revered Tamer of Men,409
abandoned all heated afflictions, and gained the unimpeded mind.
He thoroughly knows the Dharma and all its meanings
and, to benefit beings, he becomes ever more diligent in his practice.
The many types of virtuous practices cultivated by the bodhisattva
are measureless, numberless, and of many different kinds.
He distinguishes and understands all of them
and dedicates them to benefiting the many kinds of beings.
With sublime wisdom, he constantly contemplates
the ultimate, vast, and genuine reality,
brings to an end [rebirth in] all states of existence without exception,
and skillfully makes dedications that accord with their true suchness.
Just as true suchness pervades all places,
so too he everywhere gathers in those in all worlds.
The bodhisattva dedicates this resolve
to enabling all beings to become free of attachment.
The power of the bodhisattva’s vows is everywhere pervasive
just as true suchness has no place in which it does not reside.
Whether perceptible or not, his mindful thought reaches everywhere
and in every instance dedicates his meritorious qualities.
As it abides in the night, so too it abides in the day,
while it also abides throughout the half-month and month,
and, whether it be years or kalpas, it also abides in them.
Just as this is so with true suchness, so too it is with his practice.
Throughout all three periods of time as well as throughout all kṣetras,
all beings, and all dharmas—
It abides in them all and yet has no place at all that it dwells.
It is with practice such as this that he makes his dedications.
Like true suchness, the originally inherent nature,
the bodhisattva arouses just such a great resolve.

762

The Flower Adornment Sutra
There is no place true suchness abides that it does not also abide.
It is with practice such as this that he makes his dedications.
Just as in true suchness, the originally inherent nature,
there has never even been one dharma that exists within it, so too,
the inapprehensibility of any intrinsic nature is their true nature.
It is through actions such as these that he makes his dedications.
Just as with the character of true suchness, so too are his actions.
Just as with the nature of true suchness, so too are his actions.
Just as the nature of true suchness is fundamental reality,
so too are his actions, the same as true suchness.
Just as true suchness has no bounds,
so too his actions have no bounds,
and thus he is free of any bonds or attachments in them.
It is because of this that these actions become pure.
A true son of the Buddha with intelligence and wisdom such as this
has resolute vows that are steadfast and unwavering.
By his wisdom’s power, he has fully penetrating comprehension
by which he enters all buddhas’ treasury of skillful means.
He has awakened to the genuine Dharma of the Dharma King
in which he is free of any attachments or any bondage.
With sovereign mastery such as this, his mind remains unimpeded
and never perceives that even a single dharma ever arises at all.
The Tathāgata’s Dharma body, the actions he performs,
as well as all worlds—they are all of that very character:
To speak of the character of all dharmas, it is that they are all signless.
To realize they have such a character —this is to know the Dharma.
The bodhisattva abides in this inconceivability
in which conception could never reach the end of it.
On entering into this station of the inconceivable,
both conception and non-conception are quiescent.
Contemplating the nature of all dharmas in this way,
he completely comprehends the differences in all karmic actions.
All attachment to the existence of a self is thus entirely extinguished
and he abides in unshakable meritorious qualities.
All the bodhisattva’s karmic rewards
bear the seal of infinite wisdom.
If such an endless inherent nature as this were to ever end,
his endless skillful means would then therefore cease.
The bodhisattva contemplates the mind as not abiding outwardly
and also as not apprehensible inwardly, either.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
763
He realizes the nature of his mind has no place it exists.
By abandoning self and dharmas, he becomes forever quiescent.
All those sons of the Buddha have realizations such as these:
“The nature of all dharmas is always empty and quiescent,”
and “There is not one dharma with the capacity to create anything.”
Thus they awaken to selflessness just the same as do the buddhas.
He fully realizes that all worlds
are identical in nature to true suchness.
If one perceives this inconceivable sign,
then one is able to realize the dharma of signlessness.
If one is able to abide in this extremely profound dharma,
always delight in cultivating the bodhisattva practices,
and, out of a wish to benefit all of the many classes of beings,
never retreat from the adornments accomplished by his great vows,
then one will transcend the world,
will never raise any false discriminations about “birth” and “death,”
will fully comprehend his own mind as like an illusory conjuration,
and will diligently cultivate the many practices to liberate all beings.
With right mindfulness, the bodhisattva contemplates the world
as arising in every case from karma-based conditions.
He cultivates all the practices wishing to rescue and liberate beings,
including all without exception within the three realms of existence.
He fully realizes that all the various distinctions among beings
are but discriminations produced by acts of perception.
He contemplates these matters and fully understands them all,
yet never does so in ways contradicting the nature of dharmas.
The wise fully understand the Dharma of all buddhas
and dedicate all their practices such as these.
With deeply sympathetic pity for all beings,
they enable them to rightly contemplate the true Dharma.410
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication of unattached and unbound liberation?
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva reveres all
roots of goodness. That is to say, he reveres emancipation from
saṃsāra, reveres the gathering of all roots of goodness, reveres the
aspiration to acquire roots of goodness, reveres repentance of all
karmic transgressions, reveres joyful accordance with all roots of
goodness, reveres bowing in reverence to all buddhas, reveres plac­
ing the palms together in respect; reveres bowing down in rever­
ence at stupas and temples, and reveres entreating the Buddha to
speak the Dharma. He reveres the many different kinds of roots

764

The Flower Adornment Sutra
of goodness such as these and both accords with and approves of
them.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva reveres
all those roots of goodness, accords with them, and approves of
them, he experiences the most ultimate happiness and steadfast
resolute faith in them, becomes securely established in them, and
enables others to become securely established in them. He diligently
cultivates nonattachment to them and freely accumulates them. He
develops supreme determination, comes to abide in the sphere of
the Tathāgata, gains increasing strength, and attains the knowledge
and vision of them all. Then, in the following ways, he dedicates all
his roots of goodness:411
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness]412 to using the mind of
the unattached and unbound liberation to perfect the physical
actions of Samantabhadra.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to purify the verbal actions
of Samantabhadra.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to fulfill the mental actions
of Samantabhadra.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to arouse the vast vigor of
Samantabhadra.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to acquire Samantabhadra’s
unimpeded voice dhāraṇī gateway in which the range of his
voice is so vast that it pervades the Dharma realm.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to acquire Samantabhadra’s
vision-of-all-buddhas dhāraṇī gateway with which he con­
stantly sees all buddhas of the ten directions.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
complete-comprehension-of-all-voices
dhāraṇī
gateway
in
which he expounds on countless dharmas in the same lan­
guage [as all listeners].
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
abiding-in-all-kalpas dhāraṇī gateway in which he cultivates the
bodhisattva practices throughout the ten directions.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
765
powers of sovereign mastery in which, until the end of all future
kalpas, he constantly and uninterruptedly reveals the cultiva­
tion of all bodhisattva practices in the body of a single being
and, just as he does so in the body of a single being, so too does
he do so in the same way in the bodies of all beings.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which he everywhere enters all
the many sites of enlightenment and everywhere manifests the
cultivation of the bodhisattva practices in the presence of all
buddhas.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of the Buddha’s sovereign mastery in which, in a single
gateway, he manifests the endless passage through an ineffable-
ineffable number of kalpas during which he enables all beings
to awaken and enter.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of the Buddha’s sovereign mastery in which, in many
different gateways, he manifests the endless passage through
an ineffable-ineffable number of kalpas during which he enables
all beings to awaken and enter with their bodies appearing
everywhere in the presence of all buddhas.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which, in each successive mind-
moment, he enables an ineffable-ineffable number of beings to
abide in the wisdom of the ten powers and never tires of doing
this.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which, within the bodies of all
beings, he manifests the masterful spiritual superknowledges
of all buddhas and enables all beings to abide in the practices
of Samantabhadra.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which, in the languages of
every being, he speaks the languages of all beings and enables
all beings, every one of them, to abide on the ground of all-
knowledge.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s

766

The Flower Adornment Sutra
powers of sovereign mastery in which, within the bodies of
every being, he contains the bodies of all beings and enables
them all to regard themselves as perfecting the body of a bud­
dha.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which he is able to use a single
flower to adorn all worlds of the ten directions;
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which he emanates a great voice
which, pervading the Dharma realm, is heard everywhere in
all buddha lands where it gathers in and trains all beings.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which, to the end of future
time, in each successive mind-moment throughout an ineffable-
ineffable number of kalpas, he is everywhere able to enter all
worlds and use the spiritual powers of a buddha to adorn them
however he wishes.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
powers of sovereign mastery in which, to the end of future time,
in those kalpas in which he abides, he is always able to every­
where enter all worlds and manifest the attainment of buddha­
hood in those worlds.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
practices in which, with but a single ray of light, he illuminates
all worlds throughout the realms of empty space.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
practices, acquire measureless wisdom, possess all the spiritual
superknowledges, and teach the many different kinds of dhar­
mas.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
practices in which he enters the Tathāgata’s unfathomable spiri­
tual superknowledges and wisdom which persist throughout
all kalpas.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
practices in which he dwells wherever the tathāgatas are

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
767
throughout the Dharma realm, using the spiritual powers of
the Buddha to tirelessly cultivate all the physical, verbal, and
mental actions included in the bodhisattva practices.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
practices in which, while never contradicting the meaning
and never departing from the Dharma, he uses pure words
and phrases and endless eloquence to teach and train beings,
thereby enabling them to become bound to realize the unex­
celled bodhi of all buddhas.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices in which, when he enters a single
Dharma gateway, he emanates measureless light illuminating
all the inconceivably many Dharma gateways and, just as this
occurs within this one Dharma gateway, so too does this occur
within all Dharma gateways through which he achieves an
unimpeded penetrating comprehension by which he becomes
bound to ultimately reach the ground of all-knowledge.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to abide in the bodhisat­
tva practices in which, with sovereign mastery in the Dharma,
he reaches the far shore of perfection in the adornments
of Samantabhadra and uses all-knowledge to contemplate,
awaken to, and enter every sphere of experience while still
never exhausting the capacities of all-knowledge.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to incessantly abide in
Samantabhadra’s practices beginning with this life and con­
tinuing on to the end of future time until he acquires all-knowl­
edge, awakens to an ineffable-ineffable number of dharmas of
reality, and becomes ultimately free of delusions regarding the
Dharma.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate the works of
Samantabhadra with sovereign mastery of skillful means,
thereby acquiring the light of Dharma with which to unimped­
edly and completely illuminate the practices in the conduct of
all bodhisattvas.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices and acquire the knowledge of all
skillful means by which he knows all skillful means, namely:

768

The Flower Adornment Sutra
measureless skillful means, inconceivable skillful means, bod­
hisattva skillful means, the skillful means associated with
all-knowledge, the skillful means used by all bodhisattvas to
train beings, skillful means used in turning the wheel of the
measureless Dharma, skillful means adapted to ineffably many
different times, skillful means used to explain the many dif­
ferent kinds of dharmas, skillful means used in the treasury of
boundless fearlessness, and skillful means used to expound on
all dharmas without exception.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to abide in Samantabhadra’s
practices and perfect the physical actions which enable all
beings who see them to feel delighted, to refrain from initiat­
ing slanders, to arouse the resolve to attain bodhi without ever
retreating from it, and to succeed in reaching ultimate purity.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the unat­
tached and unbound liberation to cultivate Samantabhadra’s
practices and acquire the pure knowledge with which he com­
pletely understands the languages of all beings and responds to
all beings with fully adorned words and phrases which enable
them all to feel joyful.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to abide in Samantabhadra’s
practices by which he becomes established in especially
supreme resolve, possesses a pure mind, and acquires vast spir­
itual superknowledges and vast wisdom, everywhere encoun­
tering all the vast worlds, vast lands, vast-[minded] beings,413
the ineffably vast Dharma proclaimed by all tathāgatas, and
their perfectly fulfilled treasury of vast adornments.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of
the unattached and unbound liberation to fulfill the conduct
and vows of Samantabhadra related to making dedications, to
acquire the pure body, pure mind, and pure liberations of all
buddhas, to accumulate the meritorious qualities of the Buddha,
to dwell in the Buddha’s sphere of action in which the seal of
wisdom illuminates everything, to reveal the pure actions of
the bodhisattva, to thoroughly penetrate the meanings of all
their different statements, to demonstrate the vast sovereign
mastery of all buddhas and bodhisattvas, and to manifest the
realization of right enlightenment for all beings.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to diligently cultivate
Samantabhadra’s conduct and vows as related to all faculties

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
769
by acquiring brilliantly sharp faculties, well-trained faculties,
the faculty of sovereign mastery of all dharmas, the faculty of
inexhaustibility, the faculty of diligently cultivating all roots of
goodness, the faculty of equality with all buddhas’ spheres of
action, the faculty of great vigor associated with all bodhisat­
tvas’ prediction of irreversibility, the faculty of completely
knowing the vajra realm associated with the Dharma of all
buddhas, the faculty associated with all tathāgatas’ brightly illu­
minating wisdom and its flaming vajra radiance, the faculty of
sovereign mastery in distinguishing all faculties, the faculty
of establishing countless beings in all-knowledge, boundlessly
vast faculties, the faculty of perfect fulfillment in all things; and
the faculty of unimpeded purity.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate the practices
of Samantabhadra and acquire the spiritual powers of all bod­
hisattvas, namely: the spiritual power of measurelessly vast
powers; the spiritual power of measureless masterful wisdom;
the spiritual power of manifesting in all buddha kṣetras even
without ever moving one’s body; the spiritual power of unim­
peded and incessant sovereign mastery; the spiritual power
of comprehensively gathering together all buddha kṣetras and
placing them in a single location; the spiritual power of pervad­
ing all buddha kṣetras with a single body; the spiritual power of
easeful mastery in unimpeded liberation; the spiritual power
of effortless sovereign mastery in but a single mind-moment;
the spiritual power of abiding in the absence of any inherent
existence without relying on anything at all; and the spiritual
power of arranging an ineffable number of worlds in correct
order within a single pore, roaming everywhere throughout
the Dharma realm to the sites of enlightenment of all buddhas,
instructing all beings, and enabling them all to enter the gate­
way of great wisdom.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to enter the gateways of
Samantabhadra, initiate the bodhisattva practices, use master­
ful wisdom to everywhere enter countless buddha lands in but
a single mind-moment, contain countless buddha kṣetras in a
single body, acquire the knowledge to purify buddha lands,
constantly use wisdom to contemplate and see boundlessly
many buddha lands, and never arouse any thought of prefer­
ence for the Two Vehicles.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate

770

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Samantabhadra’s practice of skillful means, enter the realm
of wisdom, be born into the family of the Tathāgata, abide in
the bodhisattva path, possess an ineffable-ineffable number
of measureless and inconceivable especially supreme aspira­
tions, incessantly carry out countless vows, and fully know all
Dharma realms throughout the three periods of time.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect the pure Dharma
gateways of Samantabhadra, completely containing in a place
the size of a hair tip all the ineffable-ineffable number of lands
throughout empty space and the entire Dharma realm, causing
them all to be clearly visible as, just as this is so in a place the
size of a hair tip, so too is this so in every place the size of a
hair tip throughout the Dharma realm and the realms of empty
space.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect Samantabhadra’s
skillful means of the profound mind in which, in but a single
mind-moment, he reveals the thoughts in the mind of a single
being throughout an ineffable-ineffable number of kalpas, and
in this same way even reveals the thoughts in the minds of all
beings throughout this same number of kalpas.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to access the ground of
skillful means practice associated with Samantabhadra’s dedi­
cations in which, in but a single body, he is able to include all
the ineffable-ineffable number of bodies throughout the entire
Dharma realm even as the realms of beings neither increase nor
decrease in number, this while also being able to do so in all
bodies throughout the entire Dharma realm in just this same
way that he does within a single body.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of
the unattached and unbound liberation to perfect the skillful
means associated with Samantabhadra’s great vows, to aban­
don all inverted perceptions, inverted thoughts, and inverted
views, to everywhere enter the realms of all buddhas, to always
see all buddhas’ pure Dharma body commensurate with the
realms of empty space while also seeing their adornment with
the major marks and secondary signs, their sovereign mastery
of spiritual powers, and their constant use of their exquisite
voice to unimpededly and endlessly reveal and expound [on
the Dharma], thereby enabling those who hear to accept and
uphold the teachings as taught, even as they realize the body of
the Tathāgata is completely inapprehensible.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
771
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices, dwell on the bodhisattva grounds,
and enter all worlds in but a single mind-moment, namely enter­
ing upward-facing worlds, entering inverted worlds, and enter­
ing an ineffable-ineffable number of vast worlds in all places in
their network throughout the ten directions, everywhere dis­
tinguishing all Dharma realms with the Indra’s net-based skill­
ful means for making distinctions in which he enables many
different worlds to enter a single world, enables an ineffable-
ineffable number of measureless worlds to enter a single world,
enables the countless worlds as arranged in all Dharma realms
to enter a single world, and enables the countless worlds as
arranged in all realms of empty space to enter a single world,
making them all clearly visible while still not interfering with
the character of their arrangement.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate the conduct
and vows of Samantabhadra, acquire the Buddha’s summit-
anointing consecration, enter the ground of skillful means in
but a single mind-moment, fully develop the wisdom jewel
enabling establishment in the many practices, and become able
to fully know all perceptions, namely perceptions of beings,
perceptions of dharmas, perceptions of kṣetras, perceptions of
directions, perceptions of buddhas, perceptions of lifetimes,414
perceptions of karma, perceptions of practices, perceptions of
realms, perceptions of liberation,415 perceptions of the facul­
ties, perceptions of time, perceptions of compliance, percep­
tions of afflictions, perceptions of purity, perceptions of ripen­
ing, perceptions of seeing the Buddha, perceptions of turning
the Dharma wheel, perceptions of hearing the Dharma and
completely understanding it, perceptions of training, percep­
tions of measurelessness, perceptions of emancipation, per­
ceptions of many different grounds, perceptions of countless
grounds, perceptions of bodhisattvas’ complete knowing, per­
ceptions of bodhisattvas’ cultivation, perceptions of bodhisat­
tvas’ samādhis, perceptions of bodhisattvas’ emergence from
samādhis, perceptions of bodhisattvas’ development, percep­
tions of bodhisattvas’ destruction, perceptions of bodhisatt­
vas’ death, perceptions of bodhisattvas’ birth, perceptions of
bodhisattvas’ liberation, perceptions of bodhisattvas’ sover­
eign masteries, perceptions of bodhisattvas’ stewardship, per­
ceptions of bodhisattvas’ spheres of experience, perceptions
of kalpas’ creation and destruction, perceptions of brightness,

772

The Flower Adornment Sutra
perceptions of darkness, perceptions of daytime, perceptions of
nighttime, perceptions of changes in a half-month, a full month,
a season, or a year, perceptions of going, perceptions of coming,
perceptions of standing, perceptions of sitting, perceptions of
sleeping, and perceptions of wakefulness. In but a single mind-
moment, he is able to completely know all perceptions such as
these even as he transcends all perceptions, remains free of dis­
criminations, cuts off all obstacles, and remains free of attach­
ments. The wisdom of all buddhas completely fills his mind
and the Dharma of all buddhas enables the growth of his roots
of goodness. He shares the same single body with all tathāgatas
and he is taken in by all buddhas. He attains immaculate purity
and accords with, cultivates, and trains in the Dharma of all
buddhas, thereby reaching the far shore.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices for the sake of all beings, to pro­
duce the jewel of great wisdom, to know the countless minds
in every mind, to adapt to whatever they depend on, to adapt
to their discriminations, to adapt to their natures, to adapt to
what they do, to adapt to the functions of their actions, to adapt
to their appearances, to adapt to their reasoning, and to adapt
to their many other different kinds of differences, having none
of them that he fails to clearly perceive.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to perfect the jewel of wis­
dom of Samantabhadra’s great vows with which, in a single
place, he knows countlessly and ineffably many other places,
and, just as this is so in one place, so too is this so in all other
places in this very same way.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate the wisdom
grounds of Samantabhadra’s practices and actions, being able
to know in a single action a countless and ineffable-ineffable
number of other actions, knowing of any given action that it
is created on the basis of many different conditions while also
clearly knowing and seeing that this is so in all other actions in
the same way that it is so of any single action.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate the wisdom of
Samantabhadra that knows all dharmas, knowing an ineffable-
ineffable number of dharmas in a single dharma, knowing
a single dharma in all dharmas, and knowing of each of the

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
773
differences in all dharmas such as these that they do not entail
obstruction, opposition, or attachment.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to dwell in the bodhisattva
practices and be able to acquire Samantabhadra’s unimpeded
ear faculty in which, within the sound of a single word, he
knows an ineffable-ineffable number of sounds of words with
all their countlessly and boundlessly many differences and yet
remains free any attachments, knowing this with respect to the
sounds of all words in just the same way that he knows this of
the sound of a single word.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate the wisdom
of Samantabhadra, initiate the practices of Samantabhadra,
dwell on the grounds of Samantabhadra, and, in relation to
every dharma, expound on an ineffable-ineffable number of
dharmas, with those dharmas being vast and possessed of
many distinctions, teaching and transforming and gathering
in beings in ways consistent with inconceivable skillful means,
doing so for a measurelessly long time and doing so in all times,
adapting to beings’ dispositions, adapting to their faculties,
adapting to the circumstances of the particular time, using the
voice of the Buddha to speak Dharma for them, using a single
exquisite voice that enables joyous delight in all the countless
beings in the congregations at an ineffable number of sites of
enlightenment, enabling countless bodhisattvas in the pres­
ence of each single tathāgata in all such places throughout the
entire Dharma realm to establish themselves in the especially
supreme resolve, to bring forth the vast vision, to achieve the
most ultimately complete awareness of all the practices, to dwell
on Samantabhadra’s grounds, to become able in each successive
mind-moment to attain realized entry into whichever dharma
is spoken for them, and to become able in but a single kṣaṇa to
bring about the growth of an immeasurably, indescribably, and
ineffably vast accumulation of great wisdom as he continues
to expound in this way to the very end of all future kalpas, all
the while cultivating in every kṣetra vast practices commensu­
rate with empty space itself, thus achieving their perfectly full
perfection.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s faculty-related practice gateways, to become a
king of the great practices, and to become able to fully know in

774

The Flower Adornment Sutra
every faculty the countless faculties, the countless mental dis­
positions, and the marvelous practices produced by inconceiv­
able spheres of cognition.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of
the unattached and unbound liberation to abide within
Samantabhadra’s practices in the mind of great dedications and
thus acquire extremely subtle knowledge of forms, extremely
subtle knowledge of bodies, extremely subtle knowledge of
kṣetras, extremely subtle knowledge of kalpas, extremely subtle
knowledge of worlds, extremely subtle knowledge of regions,
extremely subtle knowledge of time, extremely subtle knowl­
edge of numbers, extremely subtle knowledge of karmic ret­
ributions, and extremely subtle knowledge of purification,
becoming able to fully know in but a single mind-moment all
the extreme subtleties such as these and yet still not becoming
frightened in mind, not becoming deluded in mind, not becom­
ing distracted, not becoming scattered, not becoming mentally
turbid, not becoming inferior, this as his mind becomes focused
on a single object, as his mind becomes skilled in quiescent
meditative absorption, as his mind becomes skilled in making
distinctions, and as his mind becomes skillfully established.416
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to abide in the bodhisat­
tva’s wisdom, to cultivate Samantabhadra’s conduct in a man­
ner free of indolence or weariness, and to become able to know
the extreme subtleties in the rebirth destinies of all beings, the
extreme subtleties in the deaths of beings, the extreme subtle­
ties in the births of beings, the extreme subtleties in the dwell­
ing of beings, the extreme subtleties in the locations of beings,
the extreme subtleties in the types of beings, the extreme
subtleties in the spheres of experience of beings, the extreme
subtleties in the practices of beings, the extreme subtleties in
the grasping of beings, and the extreme subtleties in beings’
engagement with conditions, being able to fully know in but a
single mind-moment all the extreme subtleties such as these.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to establish deep aspira­
tion, to cultivate the practices of Samantabhadra, and to become
able to know with regard to all bodhisattvas their cultivation
for the sake of beings, beginning with the time when they first
arouse the resolve [to attain bodhi], cultivating:
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s practices;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s dwelling;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
775
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s spiritual super­
knowledges;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s traveling to
countless buddha kṣetras;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s Dharma light;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s purified eyes;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s perfection of the
especially supreme resolve;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s going to visit the
sites of enlightenment and congregations of all tathāgatas;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s knowledge of the
dhāraṇī gateways;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s expounding on
countless grounds of fearlessness with a treasury of every
kind of eloquence;
The extreme subtleties in the characteristics of the bodhisat­
tva’s countless samādhis;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
seeing-all-buddhas samādhis;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
extremely deep samādhis;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
great adornment samādhis;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
Dharma realm samādhis;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
samādhis involving great sovereign mastery of the spiri­
tual superknowledges;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
samādhis in which vast practices are sustained to the very
end of future time;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
samādhis in which countless differences are produced;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
samādhis in which they are born in the presence of all bud­
dhas, diligently cultivate offerings, and never leave them;
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisat­
tva’s samādhis in which their cultivation of everything is
extremely profound, vast, unobstructed, and unimpeded;
and
The extreme subtleties in the knowledge of the bodhisattva’s
samādhis in which they ultimately arrive at all the wisdom

776

The Flower Adornment Sutra
grounds, sustain their practice of the wisdom grounds,
arrive at the ground of great spiritual superknowledges,
arrive at the ground of the definite meaning, and abandon
obscurations.
He is able to know all the extreme subtleties such as these.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices and thus come to know all of the
following:
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s establishment in
wisdom;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s grounds;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s measureless prac­
tices;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s generation of
dedications;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s acquisition of the
treasury of all buddhas;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s contemplative
wisdom;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s spiritual super­
knowledges and vow power;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s expositions of
samādhis;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s sovereign mas­
tery of skillful means;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s seals;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s lifetime imme­
diately prior to the one in which he attains buddhahood;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s birth into the
Tuṣita Heaven;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s dwelling in the
celestial palace;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s purification of
buddha lands;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s contemplation of
life in the human realm;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s emanation of
great light;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s especially
supreme family lineage;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
777
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s congregation at
the site of enlightenment;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s taking on rebirths
throughout all worlds;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s manifestation in
a single body at the end of all his bodies’ lifetimes;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s entering his
mother’s womb;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s abiding within
his mother’s womb;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s freely manifest­
ing congregations at all sites of enlightenment throughout
the entire Dharma realm even as he resides within his
mother’s womb;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s manifesting the
spiritual powers of all buddhas even as he resides within
his mother’s womb;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s manifesting tak­
ing birth;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s knowledge when,
like a lion, he strode seven paces;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s knowledge of
skillful means when he manifested as dwelling in the
royal palace;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s leaving the home
life to cultivate the training practices;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s sitting at the site
of enlightenment beneath the bodhi tree;
The extreme subtleties in the bodhisattva’s defeating the
armies of Māra and realizing anuttara-samyak-saṃbodhi;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s sitting on the bodhi
seat, emanating great radiance that illuminated the worlds
of the ten directions;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s manifesting count­
less spiritual transformations;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s roaring the lion’s
roar and entering the great nirvāṇa;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s unimpeded train­
ing of all beings;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s inconceivable pow­
ers of sovereign mastery and his vajra-like bodhi resolve;

778

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s sphere of action in
which he is everywhere protectively mindful of those in
all worlds;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s unremittingly car­
rying out the buddha works to the very end of all future
kalpas;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s implementation
of unimpeded spiritual powers throughout the Dharma
realm;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s pervasive mani­
festation of the realization of buddhahood and training
of beings in all worlds to the very ends of the realms of
empty space;
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s manifestation of
countless buddha bodies from a single buddha body; and
The extreme subtleties in the Tathāgata’s sovereign mas­
tery of wisdom while abiding at the site of enlightenment
throughout all three periods of time of the past, the future,
and the present.
He is able to completely know, perfect, and purify all such extreme
subtleties as these. He is able to manifest them everywhere in all
worlds. In each succeeding mind-moment, he increases his wis­
dom, perfectly fulfilling it and never retreating from it. Using
skillful means, he ceaselessly cultivates the bodhisattva practices,
perfects the ground of Samantabhadra’s dedications, acquires
the meritorious qualities of all tathāgatas, never tires of or gives
up what bodhisattvas practice, and develops the bodhisattva’s
directly manifested spheres of cognition. He purifies all the count­
less skillful means, everywhere strives to bring peace and secu­
rity to all beings, cultivates the bodhisattva practices, perfects the
ground of the bodhisattva’s greatly awesome virtue, attains what­
ever the bodhisattva’s mind aspires to, acquires Vajra Banner’s
gateways to dedications, and produces the Dharma realms’ trea­
sury of all meritorious qualities.
He enters the extremely sublime Dharma gateways of all bod­
hisattvas, expounds on all the meanings of reality, remains free
of contradiction or error in his use of skillful means related to
the Dharma, makes great vows, and never abandons beings. In
but a single mind-moment, he completely knows the treasury of
all spheres of cognition on the grounds of the conceptual and
non-conceptual. In non-conceptual circumstances, he manifests
the conceptual. Leaving verbal discourse far behind, he becomes
securely established in wisdom. In the practices whose practice is

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
779
common to all bodhisattvas, through the power of sovereign mas­
tery, he always and incessantly manifests the realization of the
path to buddhahood to the very end of future time. He is able to
use the power of spiritual superknowledges and vows to appear
within all worlds, among their beings, within their kalpas, and in
a manner consistent with what has been established through their
erroneous conceptions and verbal discourse.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices and acquire the extremely subtle
knowledge of all the realms of beings, namely:
The extremely subtle knowledge of the distinctions within
the realms of beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the verbal discourse
within the realms of beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the attachments within
the realms of beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the different types within
the realms of beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the same types within
the realms of beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the countless destinies
within the realms of beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the inconceivable actions
brought about by the many different kinds of discrimina­
tions occurring within the realms of beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the countless defilements
within the realms of beings; and
The extremely subtle knowledge of the countless kinds of
purity within the realms of beings.
He is able in but a single mind-moment to know with wisdom
and in accordance with reality all such extreme subtleties as these
in the spheres of experience of all realms of beings. He attracts
beings on a vast scale and speaks Dharma for them, revealing
and explaining many different kinds of pure Dharma gateways,
enabling them to cultivate the vast wisdom of the bodhisattva,
emanating countless transformation bodies delighting all who
see them, using the sunlight of wisdom to illuminate the mind
of the bodhisattva, and enabling beings to awaken to sovereign
mastery in the exercise of wisdom.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate

780

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Samantabhadra’s practice in all worlds for the sake of beings
and to acquire extremely subtle knowledge of all worlds to the
very ends of the realms of empty space and throughout the
Dharma realm, namely:
The extremely subtle knowledge of small worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of large worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of defiled worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of pure worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of incomparable worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of various kinds of worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of vast worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of constricted worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of worlds with unimpeded
adornments;
The extremely subtle knowledge of buddhas appearing
throughout all worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the proclamation of right
Dharma throughout all worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of manifesting bodies
throughout all worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of emanating great light
throughout all worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the manifestation of
the masterful spiritual superknowledges of all buddhas
throughout all worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the use of a single voice
to manifest all voices throughout all worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of entry into the congre­
gations at all sites of enlightenment in all buddha kṣetras
throughout all worlds;
The extremely subtle knowledge of using all the buddha
kṣetras throughout the Dharma realm to make a single
buddha kṣetra;
The extremely subtle knowledge of using a single buddha
kṣetra to make all buddha kṣetras throughout the Dharma
realm;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all worlds as
like a dream;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all worlds as
like reflected images; and
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all worlds as
like an illusory conjuration.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
781
He completely knows these matters in this way and thus mani­
fests the path of all bodhisattvas, enters the wisdom and spiri­
tual superknowledges of Samantabhadra’s practices, and acquires
Samantabhadra’s contemplations. He incessantly cultivates the
bodhisattva practices and attains sovereign mastery in the spiri­
tual superknowledges of all buddhas. He possesses the unim­
peded body, abides in independent wisdom, and is free of any
attachment even to good dharmas. He finds nothing apprehen­
sible in any actions of the mind and arouses thoughts of renun­
ciation in all situations. He produces thoughts of pure cultivation
regarding the bodhisattva practices, becomes free of thoughts of
attachment to all-knowledge, adorns himself with all samādhis,
and uses wisdom in accordance with all the Dharma realms.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation to enter the practice gate­
ways of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva and acquire countless
forms of extremely subtle knowledge about the Dharma realm,
[namely]:
The extremely subtle knowledge of the exposition of all
Dharma realms;
The extremely subtle knowledge of entering the vast Dharma
realm;
The extremely subtle knowledge that makes distinctions
regarding the inconceivable Dharma realm;
The extremely subtle knowledge that makes distinctions
regarding all Dharma realms;
The extremely subtle knowledge of pervading all Dharma
realms in but a single mind-moment;
The extremely subtle knowledge of everywhere entering all
Dharma realms;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all Dharma
realms are inapprehensible;
The extremely subtle knowledge that contemplates all
Dharma realms as unimpeded by anything at all;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all Dharma
realms as unproduced; and
The extremely subtle knowledge that manifests spiritual
transformations in all Dharma realms.
With vast wisdom he knows in accordance with reality all these
kinds of extremely subtle knowledge about all Dharma realms.
With sovereign mastery in the Dharma, he reveals the practices
of Samantabhadra and enables all beings to become fully satisfied

782

The Flower Adornment Sutra
while never abandoning their meaning, never becoming attached
to dharmas, producing impartial and unimpeded wisdom, know­
ing the bases of all that is unimpeded, not abiding in any dharma,
never violating the nature of all dharmas, according with reality
and remaining as free of defilement as empty space, adapting to
the world in speaking, explaining the genuine meaning, reveal­
ing the quiescent nature, not depending on, abiding in, or making
discriminations about any objective sphere, clearly seeing the vast
arrangement of the Dharma realm, completely understanding all
worlds as well as all dharmas as characterized by uniform equal­
ity and non-duality, thus abandoning all attachments.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind of the unat­
tached and unbound liberation to cultivate Samantabhadra’s
practices and develop extremely subtle knowledge of kalpas,
namely:
The extremely subtle knowledge that makes an ineffable
number of kalpas into a single mind-moment;
The extremely subtle knowledge that makes a single mind-
moment into an ineffable number of kalpas;
The extremely subtle knowledge that makes an asaṃkhyeya
kalpa enter a single kalpa;
The extremely subtle knowledge that places a single kalpa
into an asaṃkhyeya kalpa;
The extremely subtle knowledge that places a long kalpa into
a short kalpa;
The extremely subtle knowledge that places a short kalpa
into a long kalpa;
The extremely subtle knowledge that enters kalpas in which
there is a buddha and kalpas in which there is no buddha;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows the number of
all kalpas;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all kalpas and
non-kalpas; and
The extremely subtle knowledge that sees all kalpas of the
three periods of time in a single mind-moment.
In but a single mind-moment, with the wisdom of the Tathāgata,
he knows in accordance with reality all such extremely subtle
knowledge of kalpas. He attains: the mind that is the king of all
bodhisattvas’ perfectly fulfilled practice; the mind that enters
the practice of Samantabhadra; the mind that abandons all dis­
criminations about the conceptual speculations of non-Buddhist
paths; the mind that is tireless in making great vows; the mind

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
783
that everywhere sees the net of countless worlds filled with count­
less buddhas; the mind that is able to hear of and uphold the roots
of goodness of all buddhas and the practices of all bodhisattvas;
the mind that, having heard of the vast practices used to comfort
all beings, then never forgets them; the mind that is able to mani­
fest a buddha’s appearance in the world in all kalpas; the mind
that incessantly practices the unmoving practice in every world to
the very end of future time; and the mind that in all worlds com­
pletely fulfills the physical actions of a tathāgata in the body and
mind of a bodhisattva.
[He dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the mind
of the unattached and unbound liberation to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices, achieve irreversibility, and acquire
extremely subtle knowledge of all dharmas, namely:
The extremely subtle knowledge of extremely profound
dharmas;
The extremely subtle knowledge of vast dharmas;
The extremely subtle knowledge of many different kinds of
dharmas;
The extremely subtle knowledge of dharmas of adornment;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the measurelessness of
all dharmas;
The extremely subtle knowledge of all dharmas’ entry into a
single dharma;
The extremely subtle knowledge of a single dharma’s entry
into all dharmas;
The extremely subtle knowledge of all dharmas’ entry into
non-dharmas;
The extremely subtle knowledge of the establishment of all
dharmas in nonexistent dharmas while still not creating
any mutual interference; and
The extremely subtle knowledge of the skillful means for
penetrating all the dharmas of the Buddha without excep­
tion.
His wisdom is unimpeded in knowing in accordance with real­
ity all the kinds of subtle knowledge such as these regarding the
dharmas established in all worlds and in all verbal discourse,
knowing them all equally. He attains the mind which penetrates
the boundless Dharma realm, which abides steadfastly with deep
resolve in every Dharma realm, which establishes unimpeded
practice, which uses all-knowledge to fulfill all faculties, which
penetrates the wisdom of all buddhas, which maintains right

784

The Flower Adornment Sutra
mindfulness of skillful means, which perfects the vast meritori­
ous qualities of all buddhas, which everywhere fills the Dharma
realm, which enters the bodies of all tathāgatas, which manifests
the physical works of all bodhisattvas, which adapts to the lan­
guage used in all worlds in expounding on the Dharma, which
acquires the assistance of all buddhas’ spiritual powers in wis­
dom and mental actions, which produces countless skillful expe­
dient means, and which distinguishes all dharmas with the wis­
dom of all-knowledge.
And [he dedicates all his roots of goodness] to using the liber­
ated mind free of attachments and free of bondage to cultivate
Samantabhadra’s practices and produce all forms of extremely
subtle knowledge, namely;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all kṣetras;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows the karmic ret­
ributions of all dharmas;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows the minds of all
beings;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all times when
it is appropriate to teach the Dharma;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all Dharma
realms;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all realms
throughout empty space and all three periods of time;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all paths of ver­
bal discourse;
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all worldly prac­
tices; and
The extremely subtle knowledge that knows all world-tran­
scending practices, and so forth, up to and including the
extremely subtle knowledge of the paths of all tathāgatas,
the paths of all bodhisattvas, and the paths of all beings.
He cultivates the bodhisattva practices, abides in the path of
Samantabhadra, knows both the teachings and their meanings
in accordance with reality, and develops the wisdom that sees
all as like mere reflections, the wisdom that sees all as like mere
dreams, the wisdom that sees all as like mere illusory conjura­
tions, the wisdom that sees all as like mere echoes, the wisdom
that sees all as like mere transformationally created phenomena,
the wisdom that sees all as like mere space, quiescent wisdom,
the wisdom of all Dharma realms, independent wisdom, and the
wisdom that fathoms all dharmas of the Buddha.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
785
Sons of the Buddha, in making dedications with the unattached
and unbound mind of liberation, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva does
not make discriminations regarding either the world or worldly
dharmas, does not make discriminations regarding either bodhi or
bodhisattvas, does not make discriminations regarding either the
bodhisattva practices or the paths of emancipation, does not make
discriminations regarding either the Buddha or the dharmas of
the Buddha, does not make discriminations regarding either train­
ing beings or not training beings, does not make discriminations
regarding either roots of goodness or dedications, does not make
discriminations regarding either himself or others, does not make
discriminations regarding either a gift that is given or one who
receives a gift, does not make discriminations regarding either the
bodhisattva practices or the right and perfect enlightenment, and
does not make discriminations regarding either the Dharma or wis­
dom.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates his
roots of goodness in these ways, namely with unattached and
unbound liberation of mind, with unattached and unbound libera­
tion of the body, with unattached and unbound liberation of the
mouth, with unattached and unbound liberation of actions, with
unattached and unbound liberation of karmic rewards, with unat­
tached and unbound liberation in relation to worlds, with unat­
tached and unbound liberation in relation to buddha kṣetras, with
unattached and unbound liberation in relation to beings, with unat­
tached and unbound liberation in relation to dharmas; and with
unattached and unbound liberation in relation to knowledge.
When the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes dedications in these
ways, he makes dedications like those cultivated by all buddhas of
the three periods of time when they were bodhisattvas, he trains
in accordance with dedications as made by all buddhas of the past,
he accomplishes dedications like those of all buddhas of the future,
he abides in dedications like those of all buddhas of the present, he
establishes himself in the path of dedications of all buddhas of the
past, he never abandons the path of dedications of all buddhas of
the future, and he follows the path of dedications of all buddhas of
the present.
He diligently cultivates the teachings of all buddhas of the past,
perfects the teachings of all buddhas of the future, and comes to
completely know the teachings of all buddhas of the present. He
completely fulfills the equanimity of all buddhas of the past, per­
fects the equanimity of all buddhas of the future, and establishes

786

The Flower Adornment Sutra
himself in the equanimity of all buddhas of the present. He imple­
ments the sphere of action of all buddhas of the past, abides in the
sphere of action of all buddhas of the future, and equals the sphere
of action of all buddhas of the present. He acquires the roots of
goodness of all buddhas of the three periods of time, possesses the
nature of all buddhas of the three periods of time, abides in the
practices of all buddhas of the three periods of time, and accords
with the sphere of action of all buddhas of the three periods of time.
Sons of the Buddha, this is what constitutes the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s ninth dedication, the dedication of the mind of the
unattached and unbound liberation. When the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva abides in this dedication, he becomes indestructible
even by all the vajra ring mountains. His physical appearance is
foremost among all beings and such that no one can match it. He
is able to demolish the deviant works of all the māras and appears
everywhere throughout the worlds of the ten directions, cultivating
the bodhisattva practices. Wishing to awaken all beings, he uses
excellent skillful means in teaching the Dharma of all buddhas, and
acquires great wisdom. His mind becomes free of delusion with
respect to the Dharma of all buddhas.
Wherever he is reborn, whether traveling or remaining in one
place, he always succeeds in encountering an indestructible retinue.
He is able to absorb and uphold with pure mindfulness the right
Dharma proclaimed by all buddhas of the three periods of time,
incessantly cultivating the bodhisattva practices to the very end of
all future kalpas, doing so without having anything on which he
depends or to which he is attached. He progresses in his fulfillment
of the conduct and vows of Samantabhadra, attains all-knowledge,
carries on the Buddha’s works, and perfects his sovereign mastery
of the bodhisattva’s spiritual superknowledges.
At that time, aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, Vajra Banner
Bodhisattva surveyed the ten directions and then spoke these verses:
He has never so much as raised a single disrespectful thought
toward the peerless Honored Ones throughout the ten directions.
He also respects and feels reverence for
whatever meritorious works they have cultivated.
All the meritorious qualities he has cultivated
have not been simply for the sake of himself or others.
He always relies on thoughts of supreme resolute faith,
and performs these dedications in order to benefit beings.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
787
He has never even momentarily raised thoughts of arrogance,
nor has he formed any inferior intentions.
He inquires into and diligently cultivates
all the physical and other kinds of deeds of the Tathāgata.
All the different kinds of roots of goodness he cultivates
are for the sake of benefiting all sentient beings.
Securely established in the deep resolve and vast understanding,
he dedicates them to gaining the Honored One’s meritorious position.
For all those in the world of their countless different types,
he uses many different skillful means and special circumstances.
Whether coarse or refined, vast, or extremely profound,
There are none he does not cultivate and completely comprehend.
For all those in the world with their many different kinds of bodies,
he enters among them using bodies the same as theirs.
Cultivating together with these, he attains complete awakening,
perfects the gateway of wisdom, and attains irreversibility.
In the worlds and lands of countless kinds,
differing in being subtle, vast, upward facing, or inverted,
the bodhisattva is able through the gateway of wisdom
to have none of them he does not see within but a single pore.
The mental actions of beings are countless,
yet he is able to cause them all to equally enter the one mind.
Using the gateway of wisdom he enables them all to awaken
and attain irreversibility in whatever they cultivate.
The faculties of beings as well as their aspirations,
whether superior, middling, or inferior—they are not the same.
All of those extremely profound and difficult-to-know matters,
he is able to completely know in accordance with their basic natures.
All the many different karmic deeds done by beings,
whether superior, middling, or inferior, they are each different.
The bodhisattva deeply enters the powers of the Tathāgata
and then, using the gateway of wisdom, sees them all clearly.
Inconceivably and countlessly many kalpas—
He is able to cause to equally enter but a single mind-moment.
Having seen them in this way, he goes throughout the ten directions
and cultivates all of the pure karmic deeds.
The past, the future, and the present—
He fully knows that their characteristics are each different
and yet this still never contradicts the principle of their equality.
This is the great mind’s practice of clear comprehension.

788

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The practices of the world’s beings are not the same.
Whether manifest or hidden, they are of countless kinds.
The bodhisattva knows all their different characteristic signs,
yet still knows their signs are in all cases signless.
The power of the masterful spiritual superknowledges
manifested by all buddhas of the worlds of the ten directions
are so vast as to be difficult to even conceive of.
The bodhisattva is able to distinguish and know them all.
The self-awakened ones, the Lions Among Men
in the Tuṣita Heaven in all worlds—
Their meritorious qualities are vast and their purity is peerless.
He can see them all according to their essential nature and signs.
They may manifest spiritual descent to abide in the mother’s womb,
as well as countless masterful great spiritual transformations,
gaining buddhahood, teaching the Dharma, and passing into nirvāṇa,
doing so throughout the worlds, never pausing for even a moment.
When the Lions among Men are first born,
they are welcomed and served by all those who are supremely wise.
The devas, Śakra, the Brahma Heaven King, and others—
None among them fail to revere, look up to, and serve them.
Everywhere without exception throughout the ten directions,
within the measureless and boundless Dharma realm,
without beginning or end, without far or near,
they manifest the tathāgatas’ powers of sovereign mastery.
After manifesting taking birth, the Revered Guides of all humans
stride seven paces in each of the directions.
Wishing to use the sublime Dharma to awaken the many beings,
the tathāgatas therefore contemplate them all.
They see that beings are submerged in the ocean of desire
and blanketed by blinding darkness and delusion.
Those with sovereign mastery among humans manifest a subtle smile
and reflect that they should rescue those suffering in the three realms.
They roar the great lion’s roar and speak with a marvelous voice:
“As the most revered one in the entire world,
I should light the bright lamp of pure wisdom
to extinguish the darkness of their delusion in saṃsāra.”
When the Lion Kings among Men come forth into the world,
they everywhere emanate measureless bright light,
enabling the cessation of the wretched destinies and
eternal extinguishing of the world’s many sufferings and difficulties.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
789
Sometimes they manifest as dwelling in the palace of the king and
sometimes they manifest as leaving the home life to cultivate the path.
Because they wish to benefit beings,
they manifest such powers of sovereign mastery as these.
When the tathāgatas first sit at their sites of enlightenment,
all those great earths then move and shake,
the worlds of the ten directions are all illuminated,
and beings from the six destinies of rebirth all leave behind suffering.
They shake all the palaces of the māras,
awaken the minds of beings throughout the ten directions,
and enable all who had received teachings and cultivated in the past
to then fully realize the true meaning.
All the lands throughout the ten directions,
without exception, all enter into one of their pores.
The kṣetras in all their pores are boundlessly many.
In them all they manifest the powers of the spiritual superknowledges.
The countless skillful means on which all buddhas expound—
He subsequently awakens to all of them,
and even where there are those that the tathāgatas did not explain,
he is still able to fully understand and diligently cultivate them.
Throughout the great trichiliocosms,
all the armies of Māra proliferate their strife.
Even the countless different kinds of evil they create,
with his gateways of unimpeded wisdom, he can extinguish them all.
Whether the Tathāgata is residing in the buddha kṣetras,
or also manifesting as dwelling in celestial palaces,
or perhaps manifesting bodies abiding in the Brahma Heaven Palaces,
the bodhisattva is unimpeded in seeing them all.
The Buddha manifests countless bodies of many different kinds
in which he turns the wheel of the pure and marvelous Dharma.
Even searching throughout all kalpas in the three periods of time,
one could still never find the bounds [of the places he appears].
His jeweled thrones, high and wide, and most incomparable,
fill up the countless worlds throughout the ten directions.
They are adorned with many different kinds of marvelous signs
and the buddhas sitting on them are inconceivable.
They are all surrounded by congregations of the buddhas’ sons
everywhere throughout the entire Dharma realm
in which they explain the countless practices leading to bodhi
and the path by which all the Most Supreme Ones have come forth.

790

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The works performed by all buddhas according to what is fitting
are as measureless and boundless as the Dharma realm itself.
By resort to but a single skillful expedient, the wise are able
to completely know them all, having none not exhaustively fathomed.
The power of all buddhas’ masterful spiritual superknowledges
manifests all the different kinds of bodies,
sometimes manifesting countless births in all the rebirth destinies,
sometimes appearing surrounded by a retinue of palace maidens,
and sometimes appearing in countless worlds,
manifesting as leaving the home life, attaining buddhahood,
and so forth, until they reach their final parinirvāṇa [followed by]
the distribution of physical relics and erection of stupas and temples.
All these many different kinds of boundless practices
proclaimed by the Guiding Master and in which the buddhas abide
as well as all the magnificent meritorious qualities of the Bhagavat—
These he vows to cultivate and bring them all to complete fulfillment.
While dedicating those roots of goodness,
he abides in the dharmas of skillful means such as these.
When cultivating bodhi practices in these ways,
his mind is never overcome by weariness or indolence.
All of the Tathāgata’s great spiritual superknowledges,
boundless supreme meritorious qualities,
and so forth, including all the world’s wisdom practices—
He knows them all and has none he does not exhaustively fathom.
All these lords among men such as these—
Whichever spheres of action they possess—
In but a mind-moment, he fully awakens to them all,
and yet he still never relinquishes the bodhi practices.
All the subtle practices of all buddhas
as well as the many different dharmas related to all kṣetras—
He becomes able to know them all as a matter of course
and ultimately dedicates them to reaching the far shore.
All kalpas, whether numbered or numberlessly many,
the bodhisattva fully knows as identical to a single mind-moment.
In this way, he skillfully enters the bodhi practices,
always diligently cultivating them and never retreating.
All the countlessly many kṣetras throughout the ten directions,
whether they are defiled or whether they are pure,
as well as all their tathāgatas—
The bodhisattva is able to distinguish and know them all.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
791
In each successive mind-moment, he clearly sees
all the inconceivable many measureless kalpas.
Thus in them all without exception throughout the three times,
he perfects his cultivation of the bodhisattva practices.
He penetrates the minds of everyone with equal facility,
also equally penetrates all dharmas,
and also does so in this way in all buddha kṣetras to the ends of space,
where he completely knows all their most supreme practices.
They develop all the many different varieties of wisdom
with regard to beings as well as to all dharmas.
The spiritual powers of the bodhisattva are also just so.
In this same way, everything he practices is inexhaustibly extensive.
All forms of subtle knowledge and the distinctions in each of them—
The bodhisattva accumulates them all without exception,
thoroughly knowing both their same and differing aspects,
and in this way cultivates the vast practices.
In the countless buddha kṣetras throughout the ten directions,
the kinds of beings within them are each countless.
As for the various differences in their rebirth destinies and species,
their abodes, actions, and powers, he is already able to know them all.
All of the Master Guides there are
in the past, the future, and present periods of time—
If one knows these matters and then dedicates them,
then his practice equals that of all those buddhas.
If there are those who are able to cultivate these dedications,
then this is to train in the path practiced by the buddhas
and become bound to acquire the meritorious qualities of all buddhas
as well as the wisdom of all the buddhas.
They become invulnerable to destruction by anyone in the world
and all that they train in becomes successfully accomplished.
They are always able to recollect all buddhas
and always see all those Lamps of the World.
This bodhisattva’s supreme practices are measureless.
So too are all the dharmas of his meritorious qualities.
He already abides in the Tathāgata’s unexcelled practices
and knows all of all buddhas’ powers of sovereign mastery.
Sons of the Buddha, what then is meant by the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva’s dedication that is as measureless as the Dharma
realm?417
Sons of the Buddha, having tied his topknot with the silken head­
band of immaculate purity, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides in

792

The Flower Adornment Sutra
the position of a teacher of the Dharma who extensively practices
the giving of Dharma, arouses great kindness and compassion, and
establishes beings in the resolve to attain bodhi. He always inces­
santly practices benefiting others. He nourishes his roots of good­
ness with the resolve to attain bodhi, serves beings as a trainer,
and shows beings the path to all-knowledge. Serving beings as a
sun of the treasury of Dharma, the light from his roots of goodness
everywhere illuminates everyone. His mind is impartial toward all
beings. He incessantly cultivates all the wholesome practices. His
mind is pure and undefiled and he possesses sovereign mastery in
wisdom. He never abandons any of his roots of goodness or any of
his works on the path. He serves all beings as a greatly wise cara­
van leader who everywhere enables them to enter the peaceful and
secure path of what is right. He serves all beings as a chief guide
who enables them to cultivate all the Dharma practices that pro­
duce roots of goodness. And he serves beings as an indestructibly
steadfast good spiritual friend who enables their roots of goodness
to grow and become completely developed.
Sons of the Buddha, this bodhisattva-mahāsattva takes Dharma
giving as foremost and develops all the dharmas of pristine purity.
He consolidates the resolve leading to all-knowledge and develops
ultimate steadfastness in the power of his especially supreme vows.
Developing and increasing them, he becomes endowed with great
awesome virtue. He relies on the good spiritual guide with a mind
that remains free of any flattery or deception. He reflects upon and
contemplates the boundless spheres of cognition related to the gate­
ways to all-knowledge and dedicates these roots of goodness in
these ways:
Vowing to become able to cultivate, develop, and increase all the
vast and unimpeded spheres of cognition;
Vowing to become able to absorb, retain, and expound upon
whichever of the Buddha’s right Dharma teachings he hears,
even if he only hears so little as a single statement or a single
verse;
Vowing to become able to recollect all past, future, and present
buddhas throughout all worlds equaling the Dharma realm
in their measurelessness and boundlessness, and then, having
recollected them, vowing to also cultivate the bodhisattva prac­
tices;
Also vowing to be able to use these roots of goodness from mind­
fulness of the buddhas to then cultivate the bodhisattva prac­
tices for the sake of one single being in one world, doing so to
the very end of all future kalpas,

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
793
[Also vowing that], just as he does so with this one world, so too
will he do so in all worlds throughout the Dharma realm and
the realms of empty space;
[Also vowing that], just as he does so for this one single being, so
too will he do so for all beings;
[Also vowing to be able], by resort to skillful means, to then
engage in adornments produced by the great vow to continue
this for each and every one of them on through to the exhaus­
tion of all future kalpas while still never raising any thought to
ever abandon any buddha or good spiritual guide;
[Also vowing] to always see all buddhas appearing directly before
him;
[Also vowing that] there will never be even one single buddha
who appears in the world to whom he is unable to draw near;
and
[Also] vowing to be able to cultivate and perfectly fulfill the pure
practice of the brahmacarya praised and proclaimed by all bud­
dhas and bodhisattvas, namely: unbroken brahmacarya, brah­
macarya that is never deficient, brahmacarya that is not defiled,
brahmacarya that remains immaculate, brahmacarya that remains
faultless, brahmacarya that no one could cloak, brahmacarya
praised by the Buddha, brahmacarya having nothing on which
it depends, brahmacarya that is inapprehensible, brahmacarya
that increases the bodhisattva’s purity, brahmacarya as practiced
by all buddhas of the three periods of time, brahmacarya that
is unimpeded, brahmacarya that is free of attachments, brah­
macarya that remains free of contentiousness, brahmacarya that
is never extinguished, brahmacarya that is securely established,
brahmacarya that is peerless, brahmacarya that is immovable,
brahmacarya that remains free of any disorderly aspects, and
brahmacarya that remains free of anger.
Sons of the Buddha, if the bodhisattva-mahāsattva is able to culti­
vate pure brahmacarya such as this for himself, he will then be able to
do so for the sake of all beings. Thus he enables all beings to become
securely established, enables all beings to become awakened,
enables all beings to achieve success, enables all beings to become
purified, enables all beings to become free of defilement, enables all
beings to develop shining illumination, enables all beings to part
from defilement by the sense objects, enables all beings to become
free of all obscurations, enables all beings to part from all burning
afflictions, enables all beings to abandon all the fetters and bonds,
enables all beings to forever abandon all forms of evil, and enables
all beings to become free of all harm and attain ultimate purity.

794

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Why is this so? If the bodhisattva-mahāsattva himself is unable
to attain purity in brahmacarya, he cannot enable others to attain
purity. If he himself retreats from brahmacarya, he cannot enable oth­
ers to not retreat from it. If he himself fails to maintain brahmacarya,
he cannot enable others to refrain from failing to maintain it. If he
himself abandons brahmacarya, he cannot enable others to never
abandon it. If he himself becomes indolent in maintaining brah­
macarya, he cannot enable others to refrain from indolence in main­
taining it. If he himself fails to develop resolute faith in brahmacarya,
he cannot enable others to develop resolute faith in it. If he himself
does not peacefully abide in brahmacarya, he cannot enable others to
peacefully abide in it. If he himself fails to gain realized entry into
brahmacarya, he cannot enable others to gain realized entry into it.
If he himself relinquishes brahmacarya, he cannot enable others to
never relinquish it. And if he himself becomes scattered and wavers
in brahmacarya, he cannot enable others to have minds that do not
become scattered and waver in it.
And why is this? The bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides in actions
free of inverted views, speaks the Dharma free of inverted views, is
sincerely truthful in his speech, acts in accordance with his speech,
purifies [the actions of] his body, mouth, and mind, abandons all
defilements, abides in unimpeded practices, and extinguishes all
obstacles.
Having attained a pure mind himself, the bodhisattva-
mahāsattva expounds on the mind-purifying dharmas for others.
Having cultivated harmonious patience himself and having used
roots of goodness to train his own mind, he enables others to develop
harmonious patience and use roots of goodness to train their minds.
Having abandoned doubt and regret himself, he enables others
to forever abandon doubt and regret. Having acquired pure faith
himself, he also enables others to acquire indestructible pure faith.
And having come to dwell in right Dharma himself, he also enables
beings to dwell securely in right Dharma.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva then also dedi­
cates the roots of goodness produced from Dharma giving, doing
so in these ways:
May I acquire all the endless Dharma gateways of all buddhas and
analyze and explain them for all beings everywhere, thereby
enabling them all to rejoice and gain complete satisfaction, and
may I also vanquish the deviant doctrines of all non-Buddhist
paths;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
795
May I be able for the sake of all beings to expound on the ocean of
dharmas of all buddhas of the three periods of time, explaining
every dharma’s arising, every dharma’s meaning, every dhar­
ma’s designations, every dharma’s establishment, every dhar­
ma’s explanations, every dharma’s means of revelation, every
dharma’s gateways, every dharma’s means of awakening and
entry, every dharma’s contemplation, and every dharma’s cat­
egorical position, and may I acquire everything in the bound­
less and inexhaustible treasury of Dharma; and
[May I] acquire the fearlessnesses, possess the four types of elo­
quence, and extensively and endlessly present analytic explana­
tions for beings to the very end of future time, wishing thereby
to enable all beings to establish the supreme vows and produce
unimpeded eloquence entirely free of errors, wishing thereby
to enable all beings to be filled with joyous delight, wishing
thereby to enable all beings to perfect the light of all dharmas
of purity through adapting to their particular languages while
ceaselessly expounding on this for them, and wishing thereby
to enable all beings to develop deep faith and joyous delight and
dwell in all-knowledge, completely distinguishing all dharmas
for them so that they will become free of delusions.
He then reflects in this manner: “For beings’ sakes, I should engage
in energetically diligent cultivation everywhere in all worlds and
thus acquire the measureless body of sovereign mastery that every­
where pervades the Dharma realm, acquire the measurelessly vast
mind that everywhere pervades the Dharma realm, possess the
measurelessly pure voice commensurate with the Dharma realm,
manifest a measureless congregation and site of enlightenment
commensurate with the Dharma realm, cultivate measureless bod­
hisattva works commensurate with the Dharma realm, acquire a
measureless bodhisattva abode commensurate with the Dharma
realm, realize measureless bodhisattva equanimity commensurate
with the Dharma realm, train in measureless bodhisattva dhar­
mas commensurate with the Dharma realm, abide in measureless
bodhisattva practices commensurate with the Dharma realm, and
enter measureless bodhisattva dedications commensurate with the
Dharma realm.”
These are the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedications of all these
roots of goodness which he makes to enable all beings to succeed in
acquiring all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
roots of goodness in these ways, namely: wishing to see countless

796

The Flower Adornment Sutra
buddhas commensurate with the Dharma realm, wishing to train
countless beings commensurate with the Dharma realm, wishing to
support and sustain countless buddha kṣetras commensurate with
the Dharma realm, wishing to realize countless types of bodhisat­
tva knowledge commensurate with the Dharma realm, wishing to
acquire countless fearlessnesses commensurate with the Dharma
realm,418 wishing to perfect countless bodhisattva dhāraṇī formu­
lae commensurate with the Dharma realm, wishing to acquire
countless inconceivable bodhisattva abodes commensurate with
the Dharma realm, wishing to possess countless meritorious quali­
ties commensurate with the Dharma realm, and wishing to fulfill
countless roots of goodness from benefiting beings commensurate
with the Dharma realm.
He also wishes: “By these roots of goodness, may I be enabled
to acquire commensurate merit, commensurate wisdom, commen­
surate powers, commensurate fearlessnesses, commensurate purity,
commensurate sovereign mastery, commensurate right enlighten­
ment, commensurate Dharma teaching, commensurate meaning,
commensurate decisiveness, and commensurate spiritual super­
knowledges, achieving complete fulfillment of all dharmas such as
these. Then, just as I achieve this, so too may all beings also achieve
this in a manner no different than I do.”
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
roots of goodness in these ways:
Just as the Dharma realm is measureless, may this dedication of
roots of goodness also be so, enabling the wisdom acquired to
never be measurable;
Just as the Dharma realm is boundless, may this dedication of
roots of goodness also be so, enabling the buddhas seen to be
boundlessly many;
Just as the Dharma realm is limitless, may this dedication of roots
of goodness also be so, enabling the buddha kṣetras visited to be
limitlessly many;
Just as the Dharma realm is borderless, may this dedication of
roots of goodness also be so, enabling the cultivation of bod­
hisattva practices in all worlds to be borderless;
Just as the Dharma realm is never interrupted, may this dedica­
tion of roots of goodness also be so, enabling the abiding in all-
knowledge to never be cut short;
Just as the Dharma realm is of a singular nature, may this dedi­
cation of roots of goodness also be so, enabling all beings to
become identically possessed of the same single wise nature;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
797
Just as the Dharma realm has the essential nature of purity, may
this dedication of roots of goodness also be so, enabling all
beings to acquire ultimate purity;
Just as the Dharma realm is adaptive, may this dedication of roots
of goodness also be so, enabling all beings to accord with the
conduct and vows of Samantabhadra;
Just as the Dharma realm is possessed of adornments, may this
dedication of roots of goodness also be so, enabling all beings
to become adorned with the conduct of Samantabhadra; and
Just as the Dharma realm is invulnerable to failure, may this dedi­
cation of roots of goodness also be so, enabling all bodhisattvas
to never fail to maintain their pure practices.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
these roots of goodness in these ways:
By these roots of goodness, may I serve all buddhas and bodhisat­
tvas and gladden them all;
By these roots of goodness, may I quickly succeed in gaining entry
into the nature of all-knowledge;
By these roots of goodness, may I pervade all places, cultivating
all-knowledge;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always go
and pay their respects to all buddhas;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always see
all buddhas and be able to do the works of the Buddha;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to constantly
succeed in seeing the Buddha and refrain from becoming
neglectful of the Buddha’s work;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always suc­
ceed in seeing the Buddha with a joyous and pure mind from
which they never retreat;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always suc­
ceed in seeing the Buddha with a mind that skillfully attains
complete understanding;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always suc­
ceed in seeing the Buddha and refraining from developing
attachments;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always suc­
ceed in seeing the Buddha and gaining complete and unim­
peded comprehension;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always suc­
ceed in seeing the Buddha and perfecting Samantabhadra’s
conduct;

798

The Flower Adornment Sutra
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always see
all buddhas appear directly before them and never leave them
for even a moment;
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always see
all buddhas and develop all the measureless powers of the bod­
hisattva; and
By these roots of goodness, may I enable all beings to always see
all buddhas and never forget any dharmas.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates all
roots of goodness in these ways: By dedicating them in accordance
with the non-arising nature of the Dharma realm; by dedicating
them in accordance with the fundamental nature of the Dharma
realm; by dedicating them in accordance with the essential nature
of the Dharma realm; by dedicating them in accordance with the
non-dependent nature of the Dharma realm; by dedicating them in
accordance with the never-forgotten nature of the Dharma realm;
by dedicating them in accordance with the emptiness and absence
of [any inherently existent] nature of the Dharma realm; by dedicat­
ing them in accordance with the quiescent nature of the Dharma
realm; by dedicating them in accordance with the placeless nature
of the Dharma realm; by dedicating them in accordance with the
unmoving nature of the Dharma realm; and by dedicating them in
accordance with the undifferentiated nature of the Dharma realm.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
all the proclamations and awakenings produced by his Dharma
giving and also dedicates all roots of goodness produced by this,
doing so in these ways:
May all beings become bodhisattva Dharma masters always
regarded with protective mindfulness by all buddhas;
May all beings become unexcelled Dharma masters whose skillful
means establish all beings in all-knowledge;
May all beings become indomitably eloquent Dharma masters
whose abilities in responding to challenging questions cannot
be exhausted by anyone;
May all beings become unimpeded Dharma masters who acquire
the unimpeded light of all dharmas;
May all beings become Dharma masters who are treasuries of
wisdom able to skillfully explain all dharmas of the Buddha;
May all beings become Dharma masters under all tathāgatas who
are possessed of sovereign mastery and who are well able to
analyze the Tathāgata’s wisdom;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
799
May all beings become Dharma masters with the eye of suchness
who explain Dharma in accordance with reality without rely­
ing on the aid of instruction provided by others;
May all beings become Dharma masters who hold in memory
all dharmas of the Buddha, who expound on it in accordance
with its principles, and who do not contradict the meaning of
its statements;
May all beings become Dharma masters who cultivate the path of
signlessness even as they adorn themselves with all the marvel­
ous signs, emanate measureless light, and skillfully penetrate
all dharmas;
May all beings become Dharma masters possessed of an immense
body that pervades all lands, spreads forth the great Dharma
clouds, and rains down the Dharma of all buddhas;
May all beings become Dharma masters who protect the trea­
sury of Dharma, erect the banner of invincibility, protect the
Dharma of all buddhas, and prevent the ocean of right Dharma
from diminishing;
May all beings become Dharma masters who serve as the sun of
all dharmas, acquire the Buddha’s eloquence, and skillfully
teach all dharmas;
May all beings become Dharma masters possessed of a sublime
voice and skillful means with which they skillfully teach the
boundless treasury of the Dharma realm;
May all beings become Dharma masters who have reached the far
shore of perfection in the Dharma and use wisdom and spiri­
tual superknowledges to open the treasury of right Dharma;
May all beings become Dharma masters who securely abide in
right Dharma and expound on the Tathāgata’s ultimate wis­
dom;
May all beings become Dharma masters who completely compre­
hend all dharmas and are able to discourse on the measureless
and endless meritorious qualities;
May all beings become Dharma masters who do not deceive those
in the world and who are able to use skillful means to enable
them to penetrate ultimate reality;
May all beings become Dharma masters who demolish all the
hordes of Māra and are well able to remain aware of all the
works of the māras;
May all beings become Dharma masters under the protection of
all buddhas who abandon states of mind accepting the exis­
tence of a self or possessions of a self; and

800

The Flower Adornment Sutra
May all beings become Dharma masters who bring peace and
security to the entire world and perfect the power of the bod­
hisattva’s vows to teach the Dharma.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
all roots of goodness in these ways: He does not dedicate them
because of attachment to works; does not dedicate them because
of attachment to karmic rewards; does not dedicate them because
of attachment to mental factors; does not dedicate them because of
attachment to dharmas; does not dedicate them because of attach­
ment to phenomena; does not dedicate them because of attachment
to causal factors; does not dedicate them because of attachment to
the sound of the spoken language; does not dedicate them because
of attachment to names, phrases, or syllables;419 does not dedicate
them because of attachment to dedications; and does not dedicate
them because of attachment to benefiting beings.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
roots of goodness in these ways: he does not dedicate them because
of fond attachment to physical spheres of experience; does not dedi­
cate them because of fond attachment to spheres of experience con­
sisting of sounds, smells, tastes, touchables, or dharmas [as objects
of mind]; does not dedicate them because he seeks to be reborn in
the heavens; does not dedicate them because he seeks pleasures;
does not dedicate them because of attachment to objects of desire;
does not dedicate them because he seeks to attract a following; does
not dedicate them because he seeks sovereignty; does not dedicate
them because he seeks the pleasures of existence in saṃsāra; does
not dedicate them because he is attached to saṃsāra; does not dedi­
cate them because he delights in any of the realms of existence; does
not dedicate them because he seeks the bliss of unification;420 does
not dedicate them because he seeks enjoyable places; does not dedi­
cate them because he nurtures thoughts of injuring others; does not
dedicate them in ways that damage his roots of goodness;421 does
not dedicate them for the sake of relying on the three realms of
existence; does not dedicate them because he is attached to any of
the dhyānas, liberations, or samādhis; and does not dedicate them in
order to dwell in the vehicles of śrāvaka disciples or pratyekabuddhas.
He only dedicates them to teaching and training all beings; only
dedicates them to reaching the complete fulfillment of the wisdom
of all-knowledge; only dedicates them to acquiring unimpeded wis­
dom; only dedicates them to acquiring unimpeded and pure roots
of goodness; only dedicates them to enabling the transcendence of
saṃsāra and the realization of great wisdom; only dedicates them

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
801
to enabling the great resolve to attain bodhi to become as inde­
structible as vajra; only dedicates them to perfecting the Dharma
by which one is ultimately deathless; only dedicates them to adorn­
ing the lineage of the Buddha with measureless adornments while
revealing the sovereign mastery of all-knowledge; only dedicates
them to seeking clear understanding of all bodhisattva dharmas,
great spiritual superknowledges, and wisdom; only dedicates
them in order to perfectly and irreversibly practice the practices of
Samantabhadra in all buddha kṣetras throughout the Dharma realm
and the realms of empty space while also donning the armor of
steadfast great vows and enabling all beings to dwell on the ground
of Samantabhadra; and only dedicates them to always and inces­
santly liberating beings until the end of all kalpas of the future
while constantly and uninterruptedly revealing the unobstructed
light of the ground of all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates
those roots of goodness, he performs his dedications with states of
mind such as these: he performs these dedications with a mind that
is commensurate with its fundamental nature, performs these dedi­
cations with a mind that is commensurate with the nature of dhar­
mas, performs these dedications with a mind that is commensurate
with the measurelessness of all beings, performs these dedications
with a mind that is synonymous with noncontentiousness, per­
forms these dedications with a mind that is identical to the inherent
nature in its non-arising, performs these dedications with a mind
that is free of confusion in its knowledge of dharmas, performs
these dedications with a mind that equally penetrates all three peri­
ods of time, performs these dedications with a mind that produces
the lineage of all buddhas of the three periods of time, performs
these dedications with a mind that acquires spiritual superknowl­
edges which are never lost, and performs these dedications with a
mind that produces the practices leading to all-knowledge.
He also performs these dedications to enable all beings to forever
abandon all existences in the hells; performs these dedications to
enable all beings to refrain from entering the rebirth destiny of the
animals; performs these dedications to enable all beings to refrain
from going into the regions ruled by King Yama; performs these
dedications to enable all beings to extinguish all path-obstructing
dharmas; performs these dedications to enable all beings to fulfill
all roots of goodness; performs these dedications to enable all beings
to turn the Dharma wheel in accordance with the right time and
thereby gladden everyone; performs these dedications to enable all

802

The Flower Adornment Sutra
beings to enter the sphere of the ten powers; performs these dedica­
tions to enable all beings to fulfill the bodhisattva’s boundless pure
Dharma vows; performs these dedications to enable all beings to fol­
low the teachings of all their good spiritual guides and thus become
fully complete vessels of the resolve to attain bodhi; performs these
dedications to enable all beings to absorb, retain, and cultivate the
extremely profound dharmas of the Buddha and acquire the wis­
dom light of all buddhas; performs these dedications to enable all
beings to cultivate the unimpeded practice of all bodhisattvas so
that they always appear before them; performs these dedications
to enable all beings to always see all buddhas appear before them;
performs these dedications to enable all beings to have the pure
Dharma light always appear before them; performs these dedica­
tions to enable all beings to have the fearless and great bodhi resolve
always appear before them; performs these dedications to enable
all beings to have the bodhisattva’s inconceivable wisdom always
appear before them; performs these dedications to enable all beings
to everywhere rescue and protect beings and enable the pure mind
of great compassion to always appear before them; performs these
dedications to enable all beings to use an ineffable-ineffable number
of supremely marvelous adornments to adorn all buddha kṣetras;
performs these dedications to enable all beings to vanquish all the
many māras and do away with their fighting, their snares, and their
works; performs these dedications to enable all beings to indepen­
dently cultivate the bodhisattva practices in all buddha kṣetras; and
performs these dedications to enable all beings to arouse the resolve
to gain the knowledge of all modes and enter the vast gateways of
all dharmas of the Buddha.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates these
roots of goodness to pure right mindfulness; dedicates them to cer­
tain wisdom; dedicates them to exhaustively knowing all buddha
dharmas and skillful means; dedicates them to perfecting measure­
less and unimpeded wisdom; dedicates them with the wish to fulfill
pure and especially supreme aspirations; dedicates them to abiding
in great kindness for the sake of all beings, abiding in great compas­
sion for the sake of all beings; dedicates them to abiding in great
sympathetic joy for the sake of all beings; dedicates them to abid­
ing in great equanimity for the sake of all beings; dedicates them
to forever abandoning the twofold attachment422 and dwelling in
supreme roots of goodness; dedicates them to reflecting upon, con­
templating, analyzing, and expounding upon all the dharmas of
conditioned arising; dedicates them to erecting the banner of great

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
803
courage; dedicates them to erecting the banner and treasury of
invincibility; dedicates them to vanquishing all the demon hordes;
dedicates them to acquiring the mind that is pure and unimpeded
in all dharmas; dedicates them to irreversibility in cultivating all
the bodhisattva practices; dedicates them to acquiring the mind
that delights in seeking the most supreme dharmas; dedicates them
to acquiring the mind that delights in seeking all the dharmas of
the meritorious qualities, sovereign mastery in purity, and the wis­
dom of all-knowledge; dedicates them to fulfilling all vows, doing
away with all contentiousness, acquiring the buddhas’ dharmas of
sovereign mastery and purity, and turning the irreversible wheel of
Dharma for all beings; dedicates them to acquiring the wisdom sun
of the Tathāgata’s most especially supreme Dharma that, adorned
with a hundred thousand light rays, everywhere illuminates all
beings throughout the Dharma realm; dedicates them wishing to
train all beings by adapting to whatever pleases them, always caus­
ing them to feel satisfied, never relinquishing his original vows even
to the very end of future time, listening to right Dharma, cultivating
the great practices, acquiring pure wisdom and the light of stainless
purity, cutting off all arrogance, melting away all the afflictions,
rending the net of desires, dispelling the darkness of ignorance, and
perfecting the undefiled and unimpeded dharmas; and dedicates
them for the sake of all beings to always, irreversibly, and diligently
cultivating the practices leading to all-knowledge, doing so even for
asaṃkhyeya kalpas, thereby enabling each of them to attain unim­
peded and marvelous wisdom and incessantly manifest the master­
ful spiritual superknowledges of all buddhas.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates
all roots of goodness in these ways, he should not cherish any covet­
ous attachment for the three realms of existence or the objects of the
five kinds of desire. And why is this? The bodhisattva-mahāsattva
should dedicate roots of goodness from the absence of greed, should
dedicate roots of goodness from the absence of hatred, should dedi­
cate roots of goodness from the absence of delusion, should dedi­
cate roots of goodness from non-harming, should dedicate roots of
goodness from abandoning pride, should dedicate roots of good­
ness from refraining from flattery, should dedicate roots of good­
ness from straightforwardness of character, should dedicate roots
of goodness from energetic diligence, and should dedicate roots of
goodness from cultivation.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
dedications in these ways, he acquires a mind of pure faith, delights

804

The Flower Adornment Sutra
in and patiently takes on the bodhisattva practices, cultivates the
pure path of the great bodhisattva, becomes endowed with the
lineage of the Buddha, acquires the wisdom of the Buddha, relin­
quishes all forms of evil, abandons the works of the many demons,
draws near to the good spiritual guide, succeeds in fulfilling his
own great vows, and invites beings to join in establishing great
charitable assemblies.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedi­
cates these roots of goodness from Dharma giving in these ways:
to acquire a pure and marvelous voice, to acquire a gentle voice,
to acquire a voice like a celestial drum, to acquire countless incon­
ceivable voices, to acquire a dearly pleasing voice, to acquire a pure
voice, to acquire a voice that pervades all buddha kṣetras, to acquire
a voice adorned with hundreds of thousands of nayutas of ineffables
of meritorious qualities, to acquire a high and far-reaching voice,
to acquire a vast voice, to acquire a voice that extinguishes all scat­
teredness and confusion, to acquire a voice that fills the Dharma
realm, to acquire a voice that contains within it the languages of all
beings, to acquire the knowledge of the sounds of all pure languages,
to acquire the knowledge of the sounds of countless languages, to
acquire the knowledge of the freest sound that enters all voices, to
acquire a voice with all kinds of pure adornments, to acquire a voice
that no one in the world ever tires of hearing, to acquire a voice
that is ultimately untethered to any world, to acquire a joyous voice,
to acquire the sound of the Buddha’s pure speech, to acquire the
voice that speaks all dharmas of the Buddha, abandons the obscu­
rations of delusion, and is universally renowned, to acquire the
voice adorned with dhāraṇīs that enables all beings to acquire all
dharmas, to acquire the voice that expounds on all the countless
kinds of dharmas, to acquire the voice that everywhere reaches the
countless congregations and sites of enlightenment throughout the
Dharma realm, to acquire the voice that comprehensively includes
and retains the vajra statements of the inconceivable Dharma, to
acquire the voice that explains all dharmas, to acquire the voice that
is able to expound on the ineffable number of distinctions among
the words and statements in the treasury of wisdom, to acquire the
voice that remains free of attachments in incessantly expounding
on all dharmas, to acquire the voice that brightly illuminates all
dharmas, to acquire the voice that can enable everyone in the world
to attain ultimate purity and reach all-knowledge, to acquire the
voice that comprehensively includes the meanings of all statements
of Dharma, to acquire the voice of unimpeded sovereign mastery

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
805
protected and supported by spiritual powers, and to acquire the
voice of the wisdom that has reached the far shore of perfection in
all worlds.
He also uses these roots of goodness to enable all beings to
acquire the voice that is not inferior, to acquire the fearless voice,
to acquire the voice free of defiled attachment, to acquire the voice
that gladdens the congregations at all sites of enlightenment, to
acquire the voice that accords with whatever is beautiful and sub­
lime, to acquire the voice that skillfully expounds on all dharmas of
the Buddha, to acquire the voice that severs the doubting thoughts
of all beings and enables them all to become awakened, to acquire
the voice of perfect eloquence, and to acquire the voice that every­
where awakens all beings from their long night of slumber.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
all roots of goodness in these ways:
May all beings acquire the pure Dharma body that is free of the
many kinds of transgressions;
May all beings acquire the pure and marvelous meritorious quali­
ties that are free of the many kinds of transgressions;
May all beings acquire the pure and marvelous signs that are free
of the many kinds of transgressions;
May all beings acquire the pure karmic fruits that are free of the
many kinds of transgressions;
May all beings acquire the pure mind of all-knowledge that is free
of the many kinds of transgressions;
May all beings acquire the measureless pure resolve to attain
bodhi that is free of the many kinds of transgressions;
May all beings acquire the pure skillful means completely cogni­
zant of all faculties that are free of the many kinds of transgres­
sions;
May all beings acquire the pure resolute faith that is free of the
many kinds of transgressions;
May all beings acquire the pure and diligent cultivation of the
unimpeded conduct and vows that is free of the many kinds of
transgressions; and
May all beings acquire the pure right mindfulness, wisdom, and
eloquence that are free of the many kinds of transgressions.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates all
roots of goodness for the sake of all beings:
Wishing that they will acquire all the different kinds of pure
and marvelous bodies, namely: the light body, the body that

806

The Flower Adornment Sutra
is detached from the turbidities, the undefiled body, the pure
body, the ultimately pure body, the body that is detached from
the sense objects, the body that has achieved the ultimate
detachment from the sense objects, the body that has aban­
doned defilement, the body that is dearly pleasing, and the
body that is free of obstacles;
Wishing to manifest the appearance of performing all kinds of
works in all worlds, to manifest the appearance of present­
ing discourses in all worlds, and to manifest the appearance
of becoming established in all palaces, appearing there in the
same way as the reflections in an immaculately bright mirror
which spontaneously displays all the different kinds of physi­
cal forms; and
Wishing to reveal to all beings the great bodhi practices, to reveal
to all beings the extremely profound and marvelous Dharma,
to reveal to all beings the many different kinds of meritori­
ous qualities, to reveal to all beings the path of cultivation, to
reveal to all beings the practices by which success is achieved,
to reveal to all beings the conduct and vows of the bodhisattva,
to reveal to all beings the Buddha’s appearance in the world in
each single world and in all worlds, to reveal to all beings all
buddhas’ spiritual superknowledges and transformations, to
reveal to all beings all bodhisattvas’ inconceivable liberations
and awe-inspiring powers, and to reveal to all beings the com­
plete fulfillment of the conduct and vows of Samantabhadra
and the nature of all-knowledge.
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva uses sublime and pure bodies such as
these as skillful means to gather in all beings and enable them all
to perfect the body possessed of the pure meritorious qualities and
all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
the roots of goodness produced by Dharma giving, doing so in
these ways:
Wishing that his bodies will accord with and dwell within all
worlds, cultivating the bodhisattva practices;
Wishing that, of the beings who see them, none will have done so
in vain, for they will arouse and become forever irreversible in
the resolve to attain bodhi;
Wishing that they will accord with ultimate reality and not waver
in the slightest;
Wishing that they will tirelessly abide in the bodhisattva path in
all worlds to the very end of all future kalpas;

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
807
Wishing that their great compassion will be impartial and uni­
versal, with a capacity commensurate with the Dharma realm;
Wishing that they will know the faculties of beings and always
tirelessly teach the Dharma in accordance with the right time;
Wishing that their minds will always abide in right mindfulness
of their good spiritual guides, never departing from it for even
a kṣaṇa;
Wishing that all buddhas will always appear before them and
their minds will always abide in right mindfulness of them,
never even briefly neglecting this;
Wishing that they will cultivate all roots of goodness without any
falseness;
Wishing that they will establish all beings in [the path to] all-
knowledge and enable them to remain irreversible;
Wishing that they will possess the light of all dharmas of the
Buddha; and
Wishing that they will hold up the great Dharma clouds, receive
the great Dharma rain, and cultivate the bodhisattva practices
in which they enter among all beings, enter all buddha kṣetras,
penetrate all dharmas, enter all three periods of time, penetrate
the knowledge of all beings’ karmic retributions, penetrate
the knowledge of all bodhisattvas’ skillful means, penetrate
the knowledge of all bodhisattvas’ taking birth, penetrate the
knowledge of all bodhisattvas pure spheres of action, pen­
etrate the knowledge of all bodhisattvas’ masterful spiritual
superknowledges, enter all the boundless Dharma realms, and
become securely established therein in cultivating the bod­
hisattva practices.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates the
roots of goodness he has cultivated through Dharma giving, doing
so in these ways:
Wishing that all buddha kṣetras will become purified;
Wishing that they will be adorned with an ineffable-ineffable
number of adornments;
Wishing that every one of those buddha kṣetras will become as
vast as the Dharma realm, entirely good, unimpeded, and radi­
ant with pure light;
Wishing that all the buddhas within them will manifest the real­
ization of right enlightenment;
Wishing that the pure realms within a single buddha kṣetra will
all be able to display all buddha kṣetras;
Wishing that, just as this is so with a single buddha kṣetra, so too
will this also be true of all buddha kṣetras; and

808

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Wishing that every one of those kṣetras will be adorned with
countlessly and boundlessly many adornments as voluminous
as the Dharma realm which are made of pure and marvelous
jewels, namely: asaṃkhyeyas of pristine jeweled thrones spread
with many jeweled robes; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled curtains hung
with jeweled nets; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled canopies in which all
kinds of marvelous jewels gleam with mutually reflected pen­
etrating radiance; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled clouds everywhere
raining the many kinds of jewels; asaṃkhyeyas of pervasively
present pure jeweled flowers; asaṃkhyeyas of railings composed
of the many kinds of jewels supported by exquisitely adorned
balusters; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled bells that always emanate
the sublime voices of all buddhas, circulating their sounds all
around the Dharma realm; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled lotus flowers
in all different kinds of precious colors, blooming with glori­
ous radiance; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled trees surrounding in rows
with blossoms and fruits made of countless exquisite gems;
asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled palaces in which countless bodhisattvas
dwell; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled towers that, wide and spacious,
tall and magnificent, extend off into the distance; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled ramparts composed of immense jewels and marvel­
ously fine in their adornments; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled gate­
ways draped all around with marvelous strands of precious
jewels; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled windows with immaculate
adornments composed of inconceivably many marvelous gems;
and asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled tāla palm trees shaped like crescent
moons and composed of the many kinds of jewels.
Among all phenomena such as these decorated with such adorn­
ments, set with the many kinds of jewels, immaculately pure and
inconceivable, there are none that do not arise from the Tathāgata’s
roots of goodness. All of these are replete with adornments created
from countless treasuries of jewels. In addition to these, there are
also: asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled rivers streaming forth all the dharmas
of pure goodness; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled seas filled with the waters
of Dharma; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled puṇḍarīka flowers always ema­
nating the sounds of the marvelous puṇḍarīka flower of the Dharma;
asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled Sumeru Mountains, kings of the moun­
tains of wisdom and symbols of outstanding purity; asaṃkhyeyas
of marvelous octagonal gems strung together with jeweled thread
into incomparably immaculate adornments; asaṃkhyeyas of jew­
els radiant with pure light, always emanating the light of unim­
peded great wisdom and everywhere illuminating the Dharma
realm; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled bells and chimes alternating in their

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
809
striking and ringing forth marvelous sounds; asaṃkhyeyas of pure
jewels completely filled with all the bodhisattva jewels; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled silk streamers draping down in place after place, their
colorful designs immaculately radiant; asaṃkhyeyas of marvelously
jeweled banners decorated with half-moons made of precious gems;
asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled pennants, all of them able to rain down
countless other jeweled pennants; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled sashes
hanging down in space, displaying especially marvelous adorn­
ments; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled coverlets able to produce all kinds of
different subtly pleasant physical sensations; asaṃkhyeyas of mar­
velous jewel whirlpools423 showing [images from] the bodhisattva’s
eye of all-knowledge; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled necklaces in which
every one of the jeweled necklaces displays a hundred thousand
supremely marvelous bodhisattva adornments; asaṃkhyeyas of jew­
eled palaces far superior to any other in their peerless marvelous­
ness; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled adornments embellished with vajra
and maṇi jewels; asaṃkhyeyas of many different kinds of marvelous
jewel adornments always displaying all kinds of pure and exqui­
site colors; asaṃkhyeyas of pure jewels in extraordinary shapes and
exotic colors of brightly penetrating reflected radiance; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled mountains forming completely encircling surrounding
walls resplendent in their unimpeded purity; asaṃkhyeyas of kinds
of precious incense, the fragrance of which everywhere permeates
all worlds; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled transformationally created phe­
nomena in which every one of those transformations pervades the
entire Dharma realm; and asaṃkhyeyas of jewel light rays in which
every light ray displays all kinds of light.
There are also asaṃkhyeyas of jewel light rays and the light of
pure wisdom that completely illuminates all dharmas. There are
also asaṃkhyeyas of unimpeded jewel light rays in which every
light ray pervades the Dharma realm. And there are: asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled places, all of which are filled with all kinds of jewels;
asaṃkhyeyas of jewel treasuries in which there are revealed all the
jewels in the treasury of right Dharma; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled ban­
ners bearing insignias emblematic of the Tathāgata are raised high
and stretch off into the distance; asaṃkhyeyas of precious worthies
and images of greatly wise worthies, perfectly complete in their
purity; asaṃkhyeyas of jewel-adorned parks producing the bliss of
the bodhisattvas’ samādhis; asaṃkhyeyas of precious sounds and
sounds of the Tathāgata’s sublime voice which everywhere mani­
fest throughout the world; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled forms, every one
of which emanates countless rays of light of the sublime Dharma;

810

The Flower Adornment Sutra
asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled signs, every one of which transcends the
many other kinds of signs; asaṃkhyeyas of representations of the
awe-inspiring deportment causing all who see them to be filled
with the bodhisattva’s joy and bliss; asaṃkhyeyas of accumulations
of jewels causing all who see them to produce the accumulation of
jewels of wisdom; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled peaceful abodes causing
all who see them to develop the precious mind of wholesome abid­
ing; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled robes causing those who don them to
develop the peerless samādhis of all bodhisattvas; asaṃkhyeyas of
jeweled kaṣāya robes causing those who don them to arouse the ini­
tial resolve and then acquire the dhāraṇī gateway of skillful vision;
asaṃkhyeyas of precious cultivation practices causing those who see
them to realize all jewels are the fruits of actions that are definitely
pure; asaṃkhyeyas of precious unimpeded knowledge and vision
causing all who witness them to acquire the pure Dharma eye with
which one completely understands all things; asaṃkhyeyas of trea­
suries of jewel light causing all who see them to develop a treasury
of great wisdom; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled thrones on which buddhas
sit, roaring the great lion’s roar; and asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled lamps
always emanating the light of pure wisdom.
There are asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled tāla palm trees in orderly rows
wound all around with strands of jewels, immaculately adorned.
Those trees also have: asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled trunks shooting up
from their bases, straight, round and immaculate; asaṃkhyeyas of
jeweled branches, densely adorned with the many different kinds
of gems and crowded with inconceivable birds who roost among
them, always singing marvelous songs spreading the sounds of
right Dharma; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled leaves everywhere emanating
the light of great wisdom; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled flowers on every
one of which countless bodhisattvas sit in the lotus posture as they
roam everywhere throughout the Dharma realm; and asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled fruits enabling all who see them to become irreversibly
bound to acquire the fruits of the wisdom of all-knowledge.
There are: asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled villages enabling all who see
them to abandon the dharmas of the worldly village; asaṃkhyeyas of
jeweled cities filled with beings free of all the obstacles; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled palaces inhabited by kings who possess the bodhisattva’s
nārāyaṇa body, steadfastly courageous, dressed in the armor of the
Dharma, and endowed with the irreversible resolve; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled dwellings enabling all who enter them to do away with
the mind affectionately attached to the household; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled robes enabling all who don them to fully understand

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
811
nonattachment; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled palaces filled with bodhisat­
tvas who have abandoned the life of the householder; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled precious objects causing measureless happiness in all
who see them; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled wheels emanating the light of
inconceivable wisdom and turning the irreversible wheel of Dharma;
asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled bhadra trees graced with the pristine adorn­
ments of Indra’s net; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled grounds inlaid with
adornments created from inconceivably many jewels; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled wind instruments whose clear and fresh musical sounds
fill the Dharma realm; asaṃkhyeyas of jeweled drums creating mar­
velous rhythmic harmonies which resound incessantly to the very
end of the kalpa; asaṃkhyeyas of precious beings able to gather and
preserve all of the jewels of the unexcelled Dharma; asaṃkhyeyas
of jeweled bodies completely endowed with the marvelous jewels
of countless meritorious qualities; asaṃkhyeyas of precious mouths
always sending forth the sound of all the jewels of the sublime
Dharma; asaṃkhyeyas of precious minds completely endowed with
the jewels of pure intentions, great wisdom, and vows; asaṃkhyeyas
of instances of precious mindfulness severing all delusion and
ultimately solidifying the jewel of all-knowledge; asaṃkhyeyas of
instances of precious clarity maintaining the recitation of all bud­
dhas’ Dharma jewels; asaṃkhyeyas of types of precious intelligence
certain in their complete understanding of all buddhas’ treasury of
Dharma; asaṃkhyeyas of types of precious cognition that succeed in
acquiring the great and perfectly fulfilled jewel of all-knowledge;
asaṃkhyeyas of precious eyes that are unimpeded in discernment of
the jewels of the ten powers; asaṃkhyeyas of precious ears purified
and unimpeded in their hearing of the countless sounds through­
out the Dharma realm; asaṃkhyeyas of precious noses that always
smell and follow pure and precious fragrances; asaṃkhyeyas of pre­
cious tongues that are able to discourse on the ways of speaking in
all languages; asaṃkhyeyas of precious bodies that are unimpeded
in roaming everywhere throughout the ten directions; asaṃkhyeyas
of precious mind faculties that always diligently cultivate the con­
duct and vows of Samantabhadra; asaṃkhyeyas of precious sounds,
the pure and sublime sounds of which reach throughout all realms
of the ten directions; asaṃkhyeyas of precious physical deeds that
in all their endeavors take wisdom as foremost; asaṃkhyeyas of pre­
cious verbal deeds that always speak of cultivating the jewel of
unimpeded wisdom; and asaṃkhyeyas of precious mental deeds that
acquire the ultimate and perfectly fulfilled jewel of unimpeded and
vast wisdom.

812

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also wishes
that there may be countlessly, boundlessly, and ineffably many great
bodhisattvas, all of whom have completely perfected pure wisdom,
completely filling up a single spot the size of the area within the tip
of a single hair in a single place, in a single region, and in a single
buddha kṣetra among all buddha kṣetras, and also wishes that, just
as this may be true for a single spot the size of a single hair tip in a
single place, in a single region, in a single buddha kṣetra, so too does
he also wish that this may also be just so in each and every spot the
size of a single hair tip in each and every place, in each and every
region, in each and every single buddha kṣetra everywhere through­
out empty space and the entire Dharma realm.
This is the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s dedication of roots of good­
ness wishing to everywhere adorn all buddha lands so that they are
all adorned with many different kinds of marvelous jewels. And
just as he does this with his dedications to produce jewel adorn­
ments, in the same way as extensively described here, he also makes
dedications such as these to create incense adornments, flower
adornments, garland adornments, perfume adornments, burning
incense adornments, powdered incense adornments, adornments
with robes, adornments with canopies, adornments with banners,
adornments with pennants, adornments with maṇi jewels, and so
forth, continuing on beyond this another hundredfold. In each case,
if extensively described, they are just as with his dedications to pro­
duce these jewel adornments.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates the
roots of goodness accumulated by Dharma giving and other such
deeds, dedicating them to nurturing all kinds of roots of goodness;
dedicating them to purifying all buddha kṣetras; dedicating them to
ripening all beings; dedicating them to enabling all beings to purify
their minds and become unshakable; dedicating them to enabling all
beings to penetrate the extremely profound Dharma of the Buddha;
dedicating them to enabling all beings to acquire unsurpassably
pure meritorious qualities; dedicating them to enabling all beings to
acquire the indestructible power of pure merit; dedicating them to
enabling all beings to acquire the inexhaustible power of wisdom to
liberate beings and enable them to enter the Dharma of the Buddha;
dedicating them to enabling all beings to acquire equanimity and a
measureless capacity for pure speech; dedicating them to enabling
all beings to acquire equally unimpeded vision and perfect wis­
dom that equally extend to the end of empty space and through­
out the Dharma realm; dedicating them to enabling all beings to

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
813
acquire purified recollection by which they may know all worlds
in the kalpas of the past; dedicating them to enabling all beings to
acquire the unimpeded great wisdom by which they are all able to
understand with certainty the treasury of all dharmas; dedicating
them to enabling all beings to acquire the unlimited great bodhi
that is unimpeded in reaching everywhere throughout the Dharma
realm; dedicating them to enabling all beings to acquire the roots of
goodness from equanimity, nondiscrimination, and the recognition
of others as substantially identical to oneself;424 dedicating them
to enabling all beings to acquire pure physical, verbal, and mental
karma fully adorned with all the meritorious qualities; dedicating
them to enabling all beings to acquire practices identical to those
of Samantabhadra; dedicating them to enabling all beings to enter
all the substantially identical pure buddha kṣetras; dedicating them
to enabling all beings to contemplate all-knowledge and progress
into its complete fulfillment; dedicating them to enabling all beings
to acquire roots of goodness from impartiality; dedicating them to
enabling all beings to develop the equanimous and nondiscriminat­
ing profound mind and then sequentially proceed to the complete
fulfillment of all-knowledge; dedicating them to enabling all beings
to become securely established in all the dharmas of pristine purity;
dedicating them to enabling all beings to realize all-knowledge in
but a single mind-moment, thus reaching the ultimate; and dedicat­
ing them to enabling all beings to achieve the complete fulfillment
of the pure path to all-knowledge.
Sons of the Buddha, after the bodhisattva-mahāsattva has dedi­
cated all his roots of goodness for all beings in these ways, he also:
dedicates these roots of goodness wishing to everywhere com­
pletely fulfill the power to expound on all the dharmas of pure
practice; dedicates them wishing to perfect the awesome power
of the pure practices and acquire an ineffable-ineffable number of
Dharma oceans; dedicates them wishing in every Dharma ocean
to possess measureless pure wisdom light as vast as the Dharma
realm; dedicates them wishing to explain and expound on all dhar­
mas’ different statements and meanings; dedicates them wishing
to perfect boundlessly vast samādhis of the light of all dharmas;
dedicates them wishing to accord with the eloquence of all buddhas
of the three periods of time; dedicates them wishing to perfect the
body of sovereign mastery of all buddhas of the past, future, and
present; dedicates them to revering the delightful and unimpeded
Dharma of all buddhas; dedicates them to fulfilling the mind of
great compassion and becoming forever irreversible in rescuing and

814

The Flower Adornment Sutra
protecting all beings; dedicates them wishing to perfect the unim­
peded knowledge of inconceivably many different dharmas, the
undefiled mind, and the purity of all faculties while everywhere
entering all congregations and sites of enlightenment; dedicates
them wishing to forever turn the impartial and irreversible wheel
of Dharma in all buddha lands such as these, whether inverted,
upward-facing, coarse, refined, vast, confined, small, large, defiled,
or pure; dedicates them wishing to gain in every successive mind-
moment the many different kinds of fearless and inexhaustible elo­
quence and then reveal and expound upon the light of the sublime
Dharma; dedicates them to delighting in seeking the many kinds of
goodness, to arousing the resolve to cultivate them, to developing
ever more supreme faculties, and to acquiring all dharmas, great
spiritual superknowledges, and wisdom, thus becoming completely
able to fully know all dharmas; and dedicates them wishing to
draw near to and make offerings in all congregations and sites of
enlightenment while also being able to expound on all dharmas for
all beings, thus enabling them all to be filled with joyous delight.
Sons of the Buddha, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva also dedicates
these roots of goodness in these ways: dedicating them to abiding425
in the abodes as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them
to abiding in the physical karma as measureless as the Dharma
realm; dedicating them to abiding in the verbal karma as measure­
less as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the men­
tal karma as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to
abiding in the form as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicat­
ing them to abiding in the feelings, perceptions, karmic formative
factors, and consciousnesses as measureless as the Dharma realm;
dedicating them to abiding in the aggregates as measureless as the
Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the sense realms as
measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in
the sense bases as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating
them to abiding in the inwardly associated dharmas as measureless
as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the outwardly
associated dharmas as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicat­
ing them to abiding in the [instances of the] initial setting forth as
measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in
the profound thought as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedi­
cating them to abiding in the skillful means as measureless as the
Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the resolute faith as
measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in
the faculties as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
815
to abiding in the past, present, and future periods of time as mea­
sureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the
karmic retributions as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicat­
ing them to abiding in the defilement and purity as measureless
as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the beings as
measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in
the buddha kṣetras as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicat­
ing them to abiding in the dharmas as measureless as the Dharma
realm; dedicating them to abiding in the light of the world as mea­
sureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the
buddhas and bodhisattvas as measureless as the Dharma realm;
dedicating them to abiding in the bodhisattva conduct and vows
as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in
the emancipation as measureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating
them to abiding in the bodhisattva teaching and training as mea­
sureless as the Dharma realm; dedicating them to abiding in the
non-duality as measureless as the Dharma realm; and dedicating
them to abiding in the congregations and sites of enlightenment as
measureless as the Dharma realm.
Sons of the Buddha, when the bodhisattva-mahāsattva makes
dedications in ways such as these: he abides in pure bodies as mea­
sureless as the Dharma realm; he abides in pure speech as measure­
less as the Dharma realm; he abides in pure minds as measureless
as the Dharma realm; he abides in all bodhisattvas’ pure conduct
and vows as measureless as the Dharma realm; he abides in pure
congregations and sites of enlightenment as measureless as the
Dharma realm; he abides in pure wisdom as measureless as the
Dharma realm with which he extensively explains all dharmas for
all bodhisattvas; he abides in bodies as measureless as the Dharma
realm that are able to enter all worlds throughout the Dharma
realm; and he abides in pure fearlessness arising from the light of
all dharmas that is as measureless as the Dharma realm. Thus he is
able with but a single voice to completely cut away all beings’ nets
of doubt and then, by adapting to their faculties and inclinations,
he enables them to be happy and come to dwell in the unexcelled
knowledge of all modes, the fearlessnesses, the masterful spiritual
superknowledges, and the dharmas of emancipation.
Sons of the Buddha, this is the bodhisattva-mahāsattva’s tenth
dedication in which he dwells in the dedication that is as measure­
less as the Dharma realm.
When, in this way, the bodhisattva-mahāsattva dedicates all his
roots of goodness from Dharma giving and other such deeds, he

816

The Flower Adornment Sutra
succeeds in fulfilling the measureless and boundless bodhisattva
conduct and vows of Samantabhadra and becomes able to purify all
buddha kṣetras throughout all of empty space commensurate with
the Dharma realm. He enables all beings to also perfect boundless
wisdom such as this, to fully understand all dharmas, to see in
each successive mind-moment all buddhas appearing in the world,
and to see in each successive mind-moment the measureless and
boundless powers of sovereignly mastery of the Buddha, namely:
the power of vast sovereign mastery, the power of unattached sov­
ereign mastery, the power of unimpeded sovereign mastery, the
power of inconceivable sovereign mastery, the power of sovereign
mastery in purifying all beings, the power of sovereign mastery in
establishing all worlds, the power of sovereign mastery in mani­
festing an ineffable number of languages, the power of sovereign
mastery in responding by appearing in accordance with the time,
the power of sovereign mastery in abiding in irreversible spiritual
superknowledges and wisdom, the power of sovereign mastery in
expounding on everything without exception throughout all the
boundless Dharma realms, the power of sovereign mastery in pro­
ducing the boundless eye of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, the power
of sovereign mastery in using the unimpeded ear consciousness to
hear and retain the right Dharma of all the countless buddhas, the
power of sovereign mastery in sitting in the lotus posture in a single
body that extends everywhere throughout the ten directions of the
measureless Dharma realm without crowding any of its beings, and
the power of sovereign mastery in using perfectly fulfilled wisdom
to penetrate all the countless dharmas of the three periods of time.
He also attains countless kinds of purity, namely: the purity of
all beings; the purity of all buddha kṣetras; the purity of all dhar­
mas; the purity of the wisdom that pervasively knows all places; the
purity of the boundless wisdom that reaches throughout all realms
of space; the purity of his acquisition of the knowledge of all dif­
ferent languages by which he uses all different kinds of languages
to everywhere respond to beings; the purity of his emanation of
measureless perfectly full radiance that everywhere illuminates all
the boundlessly many worlds; the purity of the wisdom that mani­
fests the practices of all bodhisattvas of the three periods of time;
the purity of the wisdom by which, in but a single mind-moment,
he everywhere enters the congregations and sites of enlightenment
of all buddhas of the three periods of time; and the purity of his
entry into all the boundlessly many worlds, enabling all beings to
do what needs to be done. In matters such as these, they succeed in

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
817
fulfilling them all, they succeed in perfecting them all, they have
already cultivated them all, they acquire them all equally, they all
manifest before them, they know and see them all, they awaken to
and enter them all, they have already contemplated them all, and
they succeed in reaching the far shore of perfection in purifying
them all.
At that time, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers, worlds in each of
the ten directions as numerous as the atoms in a hundred myriads
of buddha kṣetras all moved and shook in six ways, namely doing
so with: movement, universal movement, equal-and-universal move­
ment, rising, universal rising, equal-and-universal rising, upward
thrusting, universal upward thrusting, equal-and-universal upward
thrusting, shaking, universal shaking, equal-and-universal shaking,
roaring, universal roaring, equal-and-universal roaring, striking,
universal striking, and equal-and-universal striking.
Then, due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers and because this is the
way of the Dharma, it rained down many kinds of celestial flowers,
celestial garlands, celestial powdered incense, all the various kinds
of celestial fragrances, celestial raiment, precious jewels of the heav­
ens, celestial adornments, celestial maṇi jewels, celestial aloe wood
incense, celestial sandalwood incense, supremely marvelous celestial
canopies, all different kinds of celestial banners, celestial pennants
of various colors, asaṃkhyeyas of deva bodies, countless hundreds
of thousands of koṭīs of ineffables of marvelous celestial Dharma
sounds, inconceivably many sounds of devas praising the Buddha,
and asaṃkhyeyas of sounds of the joyousness of devas as they all
exclaimed: “Good indeed!”
Countless asaṃkhyeyas of hundreds of thousands of nayutas of
devas bowed down in reverence. Countless young devas remained
ever mindful of the buddhas and sought with undiminishing resolve
to acquire the countless meritorious qualities of the Tathāgata.
Countless young devas created many kinds of music and songs of
praise as offerings to the Tathāgata.
Hundreds of thousands of asaṃkhyeyas of devas emanated great
light that everywhere illuminated all the buddha kṣetras throughout
all of empty space and the entire Dharma realm and revealed the
realms of countless asaṃkhyeyas of buddhas as well as the transfor­
mation bodies of the Tathāgata which surpassed even the number of
all those devas.

818

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Just as this Dharma was proclaimed within the Tuṣita Heaven pal­
ace in this world, so too did this also occur in the same manner in all
the Tuṣita Heaven palaces in all worlds throughout the ten directions.
At that time, again due to the spiritual powers of the Buddha, from
beyond a number of worlds off in each of the ten directions as numer­
ous as the atoms in a hundred myriads of buddha kṣetras, there came
bodhisattvas as numerous as the atoms in a hundred myriads of bud­
dha kṣetras. Filling up the ten directions, they then spoke these words
in unison:
It is good indeed, good indeed, O Son of the Buddha, that you have
now been able to expound on these great dedications. O Son of the
Buddha, we all have the same name, “Vajra Banner,” and we have
all come to visit this land from the abode of Vajra Banner Buddha
in the Vajra Light World. Due to the Buddha’s spiritual powers,
this Dharma is also being spoken in all those worlds where the
congregations, retinues, language, and meanings of the sentences
spoken are all just as set forth here, without anything being added
or removed. We have all received the aid of the Buddha’s spiritual
powers in coming here from those lands to serve as witnesses. And
just as we have come to this assembly to serve as witnesses for you,
so too, in this same way, groups of bodhisattvas come to serve as
witnesses in all the jewel-adorned palaces of the Tuṣita Heavens in
all worlds throughout the ten directions.
At that time, Vajra Banner Bodhisattva, having been aided by the
Buddha’s spiritual powers, having surveyed all the congregations
throughout the ten directions of the Dharma realm, and having well
understood these statements and their meanings, expanded his great
mind, extended his great compassion to cover all beings, trained his
mental focus on securely establishing the lineage of all buddhas of
the three periods of time, thoroughly penetrated the dharmas of all
buddhas’ meritorious qualities, perfected the body of sovereign mas­
tery of all buddhas, and contemplated the mental dispositions of all
beings as well as all the roots of goodness they had planted. Having
distinguished and known them all, in accordance with the Dharma
body, he manifested for them a body of pure and marvelous form and
then spoke these verses:
The bodhisattva perfects the Dharma’s wisdom,
awakens to and understands boundless right Dharma gateways,
becomes a master of the training who possesses the light of Dharma,
and is unimpeded in his complete knowing of the genuine Dharma.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
819
The bodhisattva serves as a great master guide of Dharma,
reveals the extremely profound and rare Dharma,
leads forth the countless congregations of the ten directions,
and enables them all to become securely established in right Dharma.
The bodhisattva has already swallowed the Buddha’s Dharma ocean.
His Dharma cloud rains throughout the worlds of the ten directions.
His sun of Dharma rises and appears in the world
where he spreads the sublime Dharma to benefit the many beings.
He always serves as a rarely met lord of Dharma giving
who completely knows the skillful means for entering the Dharma.
The purity of the light of Dharma illuminates his mind as,
teaching the Dharma in the world, he is forever fearless.
He skillfully cultivates the mind of sovereign mastery in the Dharma,
is able to awaken to and enter all the Dharma gateways,
develops the extremely deep ocean of the sublime Dharma,
and everywhere beats the Dharma drum for the sake of beings.
He proclaims the extremely profound and rare Dharma,
uses the Dharma to nurture the growth of the meritorious qualities,
fully develops the pure mind of joy in the Dharma,
and reveals to the world the Buddha’s treasury of Dharma.
Having received the consecration of the buddhas, the Dharma kings,
he perfects the Dharma nature’s wisdom treasury body,
becomes able to completely understand all dharmas’ true character,
and becomes securely established in all the many good dharmas.
The bodhisattva cultivates the foremost kinds of giving
which all tathāgatas praise and in which they rejoice.
All that he does receives the approval of the Buddha.
Because of this he perfects the most revered among humans.
The bodhisattva perfects the sublime Dharma body,
is personally transformationally born from the Dharma of all buddhas,
becomes a lamp of Dharma for the benefit of beings,
and expounds on countlessly many of the most supreme Dharmas.
In accordance with whatever giving of wondrous Dharma he does,
he then also contemplates their roots of goodness.
As for the many good deeds that he does for beings,
he then dedicates them all with wisdom.
All the meritorious dharmas leading to attaining buddhahood—
He gives them to all the many beings by practicing dedications,
wishing thereby to enable them all to attain purity
and reach the magnificent far shore of buddhahood.

820

The Flower Adornment Sutra
The countless buddha kṣetras throughout the ten directions
are all possessed of measureless great adornments.
Such adornments as these are inconceivable
and all of them are used in the adornment of any single land.
He wishes to enable all beings to fully possess
all the pure wisdom possessed by the Tathāgata
and adorn themselves with all the meritorious qualities,
just like Samantabhadra, the true son of the Buddha.
He perfects the power of vast spiritual superknowledges
and then travels everywhere throughout all worlds,
enabling all their beings without exception
to cultivate the path of the bodhisattva.
The countless beings of the ten directions
who have been awakened by all the buddhas, the tathāgatas—
He enables them all to become like Samantabhadra
by completely fulfilling the cultivation of the most superior practices.
As for all the many different kinds of meritorious qualities
perfected by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
meritorious qualities such as these are boundless.
He wishes to enable beings to bring them all to perfect fulfillment.
The bodhisattva completely perfects the powers of sovereign mastery
and then goes to receive training wherever he should train.
Manifesting all the great spiritual superknowledges,
he travels everywhere to the countless lands of the ten directions.
The bodhisattva is able in but a single mind-moment
to visit and pay respects to countless buddhas as numerous as beings
while also gathering all dharmas in the tip of but a single hair
where they all can there be clearly seen.
The world’s beings are incalculably numerous,
yet the bodhisattva is able to distinguish and know them all.
Buddhas are just as countless as beings,
yet with great resolve, he makes offerings to them all.
All different kinds of renowned incense, supremely exquisite flowers,
the many kinds of jewels and robes as well as banners and canopies,
he distributes throughout the Dharma realm, filling it with them all,
and resolves to make offerings to all buddhas of the ten directions.
Within but a single pore he clearly sees
all the inconceivably and countlessly many buddhas,
and in every single pore, they are all present in this way.
He thus everywhere reveres all the Lamps of the World.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
821
Thus, with his entire body, he bows down in reverence in order,
doing so in this way to the boundlessly many Most Supreme Ones
while also using his words to praise them all
until the very end of all the kalpas of the future.
As for the gifts presented to but a single one of those tathāgatas,
their numbers are so measureless as to equal that of all beings.
And just as he makes offerings in this way to a single tathāgata,
so too does he also do so to all the tathāgatas.
He makes offerings to and praises all the tathāgatas
to the very end of all kalpas in all those worlds.
Though the number of kalpas in those worlds might come to an end,
that bodhisattva’s offerings still never cease.
In all the different kinds of kalpas in all those worlds,
he cultivates all the practices throughout all those kalpas.
In revering and making offerings to but one of those tathāgatas,
he may do so to the end of all kalpas and yet never grow weary.
Just as he makes offerings to a single buddha for countless kalpas,
so too does he make offerings to all buddhas in this same way,
and yet he makes no distinctions regarding these kalpas’ numbers,
nor does he become weary of making these offerings.
The Dharma realm is so vast as to have no boundaries,
yet the bodhisattva contemplates and completely understands it all.
He spreads forth immense lotus flowers everywhere within it,
and makes gifts to countless buddhas as numerous as all beings.
Those jeweled flowers’ fragrance and color are perfectly full
and their pristine adornments are extremely sublime.
There is nothing in any world that could compare to them.
He brings these as offerings to those most revered among all humans.
Countless kṣetras as numerous as beings,
he fills with marvelous jeweled canopies
and presents them all as offerings to a single tathāgata
and then presents such offerings to all buddhas in just the same way.
Incomparable perfumes of the most especially supreme types
which have never before existed in any world,
he offers to the Teachers of Devas and Humans,
doing so to the very end of kalpas as numerous as all beings.
Powdered incenses, burning incenses, supremely marvelous flowers,
the many kinds of jewels, robes, and adornments—
He makes offerings such as these to the Most Supreme Ones
as he continues to joyfully and tirelessly serve them.

822

The Flower Adornment Sutra
World-Illuminating Lamps as numerous as all beings
in every mind-moment accomplish the realization of great bodhi.
With boundlessly many verses he also sets forth their praises
and makes offerings to they who are the trainers of humans.
He cultivates the giving of unsurpassably exquisite offerings
to all the buddhas, the bhagavats, as numerous as all beings
and, for countless kalpas as numerous as all beings,
he endlessly offers up praises such as these.
When he makes offerings in these ways to all buddhas,
aided by the Buddha’s spiritual powers, he travels everywhere
to see all the countless buddhas throughout the ten directions,
abiding in the practices of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva.
All of the roots of goodness
of the past, the future, and the present
enable us to always cultivate the practices of Samantabhadra
and then swiftly be able to abide on the grounds of Samantabhadra.
May it be that all of the world’s countlessly many beings
whom all the tathāgatas know and see
will perfect [these practices] in the manner of Samantabhadra
and thus become those who are praised by those of brilliant wisdom.
This is what comprises the practice of dedications as cultivated
by all the great eminences throughout the ten directions.
All buddhas, the tathāgatas, have taught for our sakes
this unexcelled practice of dedications.
Of all the beings who reside
in all worlds without exception throughout the ten directions,
there are none among them he does not enable to become awakened,
causing them all to always adopt practices like Samantabhadra’s.
Just as he engages in dedications of his practice of giving,
so too does he also do so with his solid observance of the prohibitions,
his vigor applied for a long time without retreating in apprehension,
his patient pliancy and unshakable mind,
his dhyāna concentration with the mind focused on a single object,
and his wisdom that, in knowing objects, coincides with his samādhi
and has a penetrating comprehension of the past, future, and present,
whose boundaries no one in the world could ever find.
The bodhisattva’s physical, mental, and verbal karmic actions—
all things such as these that that they do are all pure.
All of his cultivation without exception
is the equal of that done by Samantabhadra Bodhisattva.

Chapter 25 — The Ten Dedications
823
Like the Dharma realm itself, he is free of discriminations
and forever ends all frivolous theorizing and defiled attachments.
And also like nirvāṇa, he has become unimpeded.
His mind is forever thus, apart from all grasping.
All the dharmas of dedication of those who are wise
have already been revealed by all buddhas, the tathāgatas.
He dedicates all of his many different kinds of roots of goodness.
Therefore he is able to succeed in the path of the bodhisattva.
This son of the Buddha thoroughly trains in these dedications
and fulfills all the countless practices and vows.
He completely gathers in all in the Dharma realm without exception,
and therefore he is able to perfect the powers of the Well Gone One.
If one wishes to perfect that which the Buddha has proclaimed
as the bodhisattva’s vast and especially supreme practices,
it is only fitting that one should skillfully abide in these dedications.
All such sons of the Buddha are to be called “Universally Worthy.”426
Though one might be able to calculate the number of all beings
or be able to know the number of thoughts in the three times,
still, no one could ever know the bounds of the meritorious qualities
of “Universally Worthy”427 sons of the Buddha such as these.
Though one might use a hair to measure space and find its bounds
or reduce the many kṣetras to atoms and then calculate their number,
the conduct and vows dwelt in by such great rishis
as these sons of the Buddha cannot be measured by anyone at all.
End of Chapter Twenty-Five

824

The Flower Adornment Sutra

Endnotes
1.
An “araṇya” is a quiet forest or wilderness meditation hermitage site
where a practitioner can cultivate meditation without being disturbed.
“The araṇya dharma” then refers to the practice of deep solitary medi­
tation in a secluded setting.
2. I emend an obvious graphic-similarity scribal error here, changing 玉
to 王 in accordance with the S, Y, M, and G editions.
3.
BB has: “In dwelling on any single ground, they wholly included the
meritorious qualities of all of the grounds” (住於一地，普攝一切諸地功
德 / T09n0278_p0395b25–6). QL indicates that, if translated correctly,
the SA text should refer to “using the power of an ocean of vows to
subsume all the grounds.” (L130n1557_0058b15)
4.
QL points out that “already ascended onto the Tathāgata’s ground” indi­
cates that these bodhisattva-mahāsattvas had already gained access to
the stage of buddhahood, noting that “universal illumination” consti­
tutes a general allusion to acquisition of all ten of the grounds.
5.
Although the SA text does not specify “beings” here, the BB text indeed
does so while also making it clear that what is being talked about here
are the various ways in which bodhisattvas skillfully appear before
beings in familiar forms so as to be able to teach them in ways which
they can understand and accept. HH also explains this passage in
terms of the bodhisattvas’ use of the four means of attraction to skill­
fully gain the trust of beings and make them more open to receiving
teachings.
6.
“Complete retention” (總持) is also the Chinese translation of dhāraṇī
and, as such, this is an oblique reference to these bodhisattvas’ com­
mand of these verbal formulae by which one can retain in memory
oceanic amounts of Dharma teachings.
7.
Noting that these are simply “road spirits,” QL notes that these “foot-
travel” spirits exist in relationship to those who travel by foot, serv­
ing them as their protectors. One example of this are those who sup­
port each footstep of buddhas and other holy beings with a “stepping
stone” consisting of an immense flower blossom.
8.
Although the Chinese yanjing (嚴淨) might ordinarily appear to refer
to “adorning and purifying,” its Sanskrit equivalent found in the still
extant Sanskrit texts of Chapter Twenty-Six and Chapter Thirty-Nine
as well as in BCSD (pariśodhana) makes it clear that this is simply refer­
ring to “purification.”
9.
HH indicates that this refers to the dharma-selecting eye (擇法眼) and
the wisdom eye (智慧眼).

826

The Flower Adornment Sutra
10. Skt. nirmāṇa-rati.
11. Skt. paranirmita-vaśavartin.
12. Skt. mahā-brahman.
13. Skt. ābhāsvara.
14. Skt. śubha-kṛtsna.
15. Skt. bṛhat-phala.
16. Skt. maheśvara.
17. “Resolute conviction” (勝解) or, more literally, “supreme understand­
ing,” is a translation of one of SA’s renderings into Chinese of the
Sanskrit adhimukti.
18. Although SA’s Chinese here (遊戲) for the Sanskrit vikrīḍita would seem
to infer something like “roaming and sporting,” BHSD (p. 482, Column
1) suggests that this is more usually “something like easy mastery…”.
19. This eminence was referred to earlier as “Light of Famously Ultimate
Vigor Deva King” (T10n0279_p0005b14: 極精進名稱光天王).
20. Again, this eminence was referred to earlier as “Eye of Pure Meritorious
Qualities” (T10n0279_p0005b11: 清淨功德眼天王). The close reader
should be aware that the deva names here and hereafter often vary
slightly from their earlier occurrence, mostly because they needed to fit
into a fixed Chinese verse line length of seven characters. Because they
recur in the same order as earlier in the chapter, their identity should
be readily deducible, hence I may not always point out these differ­
ences later in the chapter.
21. This is a minor variation in the name from the earlier “Renowned for
Purity Deva King.”
22. The earlier version of this deva’s name was “Delightful Supreme
Illumination Deva King” (可愛樂最勝光照天王).
23. HH explains these three spheres (tri-maṇḍala?) as referring to actions of
body, mouth, and mind.
24. This is a very different name here and as echoed in the summarizing
verses to follow when compared with the earlier name of “Pervasively
Illuminating Universal Sound Deva King” (普音遍照天王).
25. This is a different name here and in the summarizing verse below when
compared with the earlier name of “Light of Immaculate Renown Deva
King” (無垢稱光明天王).
26. I emend the reading here to accord with four other editions, preferring
“deva”(天) to “great” (大), this to correct an obvious graphic-similarity
scribal error.

Endnotes
827
27. As noted by both QL and HH, “signs of endless merit” refers to the
buddhas’ thirty-two major marks and eighty secondary characteris­
tics, each of which are manifestations of endless meritorious actions
performed in the past.
28. Lit. “Knowing Satisfaction Heavens” (知足天).
29. For this slightly ambiguous verse line which might otherwise be
interpreted to read as “impartial toward all beings,” I follow HH’s
straightforward interpretation in which, to explain its meaning, he
alludes to a line from later on in the BB translation: “The mind, the
Buddha, and beings—These three are no different.” (心佛及眾生，是三
無差別。T09n0278_p0465c29).
30. Per HH, “marks and signs” refers to the Buddha’s thirty-two marks
and eighty secondary signs.
31. QL notes that “renowned jewels” refers here to the Buddha, the
Dharma, and the Sangha. (L130n1557_0147b13)
32. Although, due to line-length restrictions, SA does not specify that
this refers to “but a single pore,” because the BB translation does, it
is reasonable to assume the Sanskrit manuscript justifies it, hence I
translate accordingly.
33. I follow HH here in reflecting in the translation the inference that
what is being referred to here is not simply a soothing sound but
rather the sound of the Buddha’s voice expounding the Dharma.
34. “Great Yakṣa King of Abundant Learning” (多聞大夜叉王), otherwise
also known as “Deva of Abundant Learning” (多聞天), is just another
name for Vaiśravaṇa that may be associated with his role in protect­
ing the site of enlightenment as a place for teaching the Dharma
and imparting great learning to followers of the Buddha. In short,
“Vaiśravaṇa” and “Great Yakṣa King of Abundant Learning” both
refer to the same being.
35. I follow three editions (S,Y,M) in emending “lord” (主) to “king” (王)
to correct an obvious graphic-similarity scribal error.
36. HH notes that “dark and fearsome paths” is a reference to the three
wretched destinies of the hells, animals, and hungry ghosts.
37. In many cases such as this, “sweet dew” (甘露) (sometimes translated
into English as “nectar or ambrosia of the devas”) is a Chinese mis­
translation for the Sanskrit amṛta, literally “the deathless” which in
turn is a synonym for nirvāṇa. Thanks to VB for pointing this out.
38. HH explains that sufferings depend on afflictions. In the absence of
afflictions, sufferings have no bases for arising.
39. Lest it seem a bit free to translate zizai (自在) as “miraculous” here
(as opposed to the more standard “sovereign mastery,” etc.), a close

828

The Flower Adornment Sutra
review of the Sanskrit of the immense (twenty-one fascicles) Chapter
Thirty-Nine, “Entering the Dharma Realm,” shows that SA nearly
always used zizai to translate vikurvati in contexts such as this where
the immediately adjacent word is “powers,” etc. It seems SA almost
never used it to translate vaśitā, vaśitva, īśvara, etc. in these contexts.
It is also interesting to note that HH, even without having a Sanskrit
text, also usually explains zizai as relating to spiritual powers in these
kinds of contexts.
40. HH equates “the vast eye” with the Buddha’s Dharma eye.
41. I follow four editions (S, Y, M, G) in restoring xuan (漩), “whirlpool,” for
xuan (旋), “to rotate,” to correct an obvious graphic-similarity scribal
error in which the water radical was dropped.
42. I emend the text here by restoring a verse missing from the Taisho edi­
tion, this in accordance with three other editions (Y, M, G), CB, and QL’s
commentary statement acknowledging its presence in the Sanskrit text
of his time (See QLSC at 0190a13): 一切世間眾導師 /法雲大雨不可測 /
消竭無窮諸苦海 / 此離垢塵入法門.
43. Following three editions (S, Y, M), I emend the text here by substituting
xi (昔), “past,” for xi (悉), “all,” to correct a fairly obvious homophonic
scribal error.
44. For the rationale behind this slightly unintuitive translation of youxi (
遊戲), otherwise seemingly something like “wandering and sporting,”
see BHSD, page 482, Column 1, definition 2 of its Sanskrit antecedent,
vikrīḍita, where this apparently more typical “easy mastery” usage
(usually related to spiritual powers) is justified with citations.
45. Following three other editions (S, Y, M), QL, and HH, I emend the Taisho
text by replacing she (攝), “attract,” with hu (護), “protect” to correct an
apparent scribal error.
46. Per HH, this is referring to the names of buddhas and bodhisattvas.
47. I follow four other editions (S, Y, M, G) as well as HH and QL in prefer­
ring xian (現), “appear,” to Taisho’s very unlikely du (覩), “to see,” which
is probably the result of a graphic-similarity scribal error.
48. This is a reference to the first of the Buddha’s ten powers, the knowl­
edge of what is and is not possible.
49. This is a reference to another of the Buddha’s ten powers, the knowl­
edge of beings’ superior and inferior faculties.
50. This is a reference to another of the Buddha’s ten powers, the knowl­
edge of the paths leading to all destinations.
51. Again, this is a reference to another of the Buddha’s ten powers, the
knowledge of the dhyānas, liberations, samādhis, samāpattis, and the
purification of the afflictions.

Endnotes
829
52. This is a reference to another of the Buddha’s ten powers, the power
of the recollection of previous existences.
53. This is a reference to another of the Buddha’s ten powers, the knowl­
edge of the deaths and rebirths of beings. It specifically refers to the
functions of the heavenly eye.
54. This line introduces the ten pāramitās which in standard order are the
topics, one per quatrain, for the ten immediately subsequent verses.
55. This line introduces the ten bodhisattva grounds which in standard
order are the topics, one per quatrain, for the ten immediately subse­
quent verses.
56. QL indicates that “universal treasury” refers to the accumulation of
merit and wisdom (積集福智故云普藏) and that “gates of impartial­
ity” refers to the ten impartial intentions (十平等心故曰等門). These
ten impartial intentions are listed in the chapter on the ten grounds
(Chapter Twenty-Six) where it says of them that “The bodhisattva-
mahāsattva employs these ten types of equally regarding pure reso­
lute intentions to achieve entry into the fifth bodhisattva ground.”
57. To correct a graphic-similarity scribal error, I follow four editions (S,
Y, M, G), QL, and HH in preferring jin (今), “now,” to Taisho’s clearly
erroneous ling (令), “to cause.”
58. Although I would ordinarily follow CB’s emendation based on the
Ming edition which includes “ocean of Dharma” and “ocean of what
is established” between Taisho’s “ocean of beings” and “ocean of
buddhas,” the testimony of commentaries such as QL (at 0280a10),
HH (digital edition), and Hanshan Deqing’s Huayan Gangyao (at
X08n0240_p0518b13) all indicate this should instead be just one addi­
tional item (not two): “the ocean of what is established in the Dharma
realm” (法界安立海). This is also supported by the reiterative verse’s
“the ocean of what is established in the Dharma realm” (法界所有安
立海) at 26b25 and also by a similar echoing statement (法界安立海)
at the beginning of Chapter Four at 34b17 right between mentions of
“the ocean all beings’ karma” and “the boundless ocean of all bud­
dhas,” again duplicating the same order of list items shown here. For
these reasons, I find CB’s judgment here to be in error. Hence I follow
QL, HS, and HH by emending the reading to include only a single
additional list item that was left out of the Taisho text: “The ocean of
what is established in the Dharma realm” (法界安立海).
59. HH glosses this as “all bodhisattvas’ quest for the path to bodhi” (一
切菩薩求菩提道). QL’s note on this says that it refers to: “victorious
progression with the great resolve in setting out on the quest for the
fruit of buddhahood.” (勝進大心趣求佛果 / 281b01)

830

The Flower Adornment Sutra
60. The Tathāgata is said to speak with a “single voice” that countless
beings then each understand in accordance with their type, hence the
reference here to this single voice being “measureless.”
61. “That most revered one of two-legged beings” (兩足尊 / dvipadottama)
refers to one of the titles of the Buddha by which he is declared to be
the most superior among all devas and humans. It is usually said to
also implicitly refer by analogy to the Buddha’s peerless two-fold ful­
fillment of merit and wisdom, the two primary provisions necessary
for progressing on the path to enlightenment (bodhisaṃbhāra).
62. HH says that this “mastery of dreams” refers to teaching Dharma to
beings in their dreams.
63. Although one might otherwise defensibly read this line as referring to
enabling beings who were dwelling in wrong meditative absorptions
to then enter right meditative absorptions, the presence here (and in the
same passage in the BB translation as well) of the very standard techni­
cal terms xie ding (邪定, skt. mithyātva-niyata) and zheng ding ju (正定聚,
skt. samyaktva-niyato rāṣiḥ) makes it clear that this is instead intended
to refer to enabling those who are certain to progress toward what is
wrong to become certain to progress toward what is right. These are
two of the “three definitely determined groups” (trayo rāśayaḥ): 1) those
who are certain to follow correct paths; 2) those who are certain to fol­
low wrong paths; and c) those whose future course is not yet decided.
QL notes only that “they use the bodhisattva practice gateways to
enable them to become certain to follow what is right” (以菩薩行門令入
正定).
64. I follow four other editions (S, Y, M, G) as well as QL, Hanshan, and Li
Tongxuan in preferring zuo (坐), “sits,” to li (立), “stands,” making this
emendation on sensibility grounds.
65. I follow HH in seeing an implicit intended reference here to what is seen
“within the pores of the bodies of every buddha” (在每位佛身上的毛孔
中). Absent this idea, it is very hard to make much sense of this qua­
train in the context in which it appears. Of course the big problem in
this whole series of verses is the choice on the part of SA and his trans­
lation team to switch to five-character verse lines which are obviously
inadequate to fully translate the conceptual density found within the
Sanskrit verses typical of this scripture which we find for instance in
the still extant Sanskrit for Chapters Twenty-six and Thirty-nine.
66. HH explains this by saying, “All of the buddhas, the world honored
ones—they are all able to purify the buddha body. They have this kind
of inconceivable sphere of action.” (諸佛世尊，他們都能清淨佛身。有這種
不可思議的境界。)

Endnotes
831
67. HH identifies these three kinds of sovereign mastery as relating to
physical, verbal, and mental actions.
68. HH explains “attach to stations of existence” as “attachment to dwell­
ing in the twenty-five stations of existence within the three realms”
(著住在三界二十五有).
69. What I translate as “resolute intentions” (勝解) corresponds to a stan­
dard Chinese translation of the Sanskrit adhimukti which of course
has a wide variety of meanings including: “resolute faith, belief, or
conviction”; “intention”; “inclination”; etc.
70. Although one would ordinarily think zizai li (自在力) would refer
to “sovereign masteries and powers,” “sovereign powers,” “freely
invoked powers,” etc., when we compare SA’s Chinese with the
Sanskrit of Chapter Thirty-Nine, we find that zizai (自在) in any sort
of proximity to “spiritual superknowledges” or “spiritual powers,”
or just “powers” is nearly always translating some permutation of
vikurvati. Hence, at least in these contexts zizai means ”miraculous,”
etc.
71. I follow CB in emending the original Taisho text here in accordance
with a variant reading found in four other editions, this to correct
an obvious graphic-similarity scribal error in which “lords” (主) was
accidentally substituted for the clearly intended “abiding” (住) char­
acter.
72. For these two lines, the BB translation has: “Clouds of light adorn the
palaces of the bodhisattvas.” (光明雲莊嚴, 諸菩薩宮殿. / T09n0278_
p0411a13.)
73. The intended meaning of the Chinese for this line, though somewhat
ambiguous in SA, is clear in BB: “If one attempts to use words to
grasp them, they cannot be apprehended.” (言取不可得 / T09n0278_
p0411a15.)
74. In the place of this somewhat ambiguous line in the SA translation,
the BB translation has “[They are like] crowns inlaid with the various
jewels.” (間錯雜寶冠 / T09n278_p0411a21.)
75. In clarifying this concept, HH cites a quotation apparently from
Sino-Buddhist literature: “Condensing countless kalpas into a single
mind-moment and stretching a single mind-moment into measure­
less kalpas.” (縮無量劫為一念，延一念為無量劫.)
76. In clarifying this concept, HH cites another quotation apparently
from Sino-Buddhist literature: “The mountains, rivers, and trees are
all the Dharma body [of all buddhas].” (山河樹木, 皆是法身.)
77. Were it not for the BB translation, the topic here would be ambiguous,
for the same Chinese characters in the SA translation (清淨方便) can

832

The Flower Adornment Sutra
just as easily be intended to refer to either “pure skillful means” or
“skillful means for achieving purity.” Because the BB translation only
refers (twice) to “kinds of purity as numerous as the atoms in a world”
(世界塵數清淨) and does not refer to “skillful means” even one time, it
is fair to conclude that “skillful means” in the SA translation is only
intended to be a reference to “techniques for achieving purity,” not to
“ten kinds of pure skillful means” which one might otherwise suspect
this passage could be referring to.
78. Ziran (自然) here does not refer to “naturally,” but rather to the buddhas’
unique feat of attaining enlightenment “on their own,” i.e. “without a
teacher.” The BB translation is much clearer here: “On their own, with­
out a teacher, attaining right enlightenment…” (自然無師得正覺).
79. The following list of kalpa durations correspond to the first nine of
what are sometimes referred to as “the ten big numbers,” namely:
asaṃkhyeya; aparimāṇa; aparyanta; asamanta; agaṇeya; atulya; acintya;
ameya; and anabhilāpya.
80. I follow QL’s interpretation of this line. In his HYSC, he states that,
“As for ‘the cessation of adornments,’ this clarifies that this circum­
stance involves the loss of good conditions and the appearance of what
is bad.” He goes on to comment: “This is to say, with the Tathāgata’s
manifestation of the appearance of entering cessation, there was a cor­
responding deterioration of capabilities such that, just a hundred years
after the Buddha’s entering nirvāṇa, the milk of the time was not even
comparable to the water [at the time of the Buddha], how much the less
in the present [Tang Dynasty] era, and how much even less so when,
[in the future], matters deteriorate to their most extreme point. Then,
mere grainfield weeds will be regarded as haute cuisine and the most
superior adornments will be made only of cast iron.” (嚴滅者此明失善
緣而惡現謂如來示滅能事隨滅佛滅百年乳不及水况今之世况於減極稗為上
味鐵為上嚴. T35n1735_p0578b04–07.)
81. My translation of this fourth line may not seem obvious to everyone.
It depends on the more traditional classical and medieval uses of ji (
及) common in the period when this translation was made such as “to
reach to,” “to arrive at,” “to attain,” etc.
82. “The period of the kalpas’ abiding” (住劫 / vivartasthāyikalpa) during
which it is more or less “stable” is the second of the four phases in the
life-cycle of an eon (formation, abiding, destruction/dissolution, and
nothingness).
83. HH points out that “titles” (名號) here refers to the list of ten names
which is standard for all buddhas.
84. In his HYSC, QL complains that this chapter title as translated is an
excessive abbreviation on the part of the translators who, in looking

Endnotes
833
at the Sanskrit text were confronted with an impossibly long, com­
plicated, and nearly untranslatable chapter title (華藏莊嚴嚴具世界海
之徧清淨功德海光明品) which would mean something like: “Light
of the Ocean of All-Pervading Purity and Meritorious Qualities of
the Lotus Treasury Adornment Adornments [Sic] Ocean of Worlds
Chapter.” He says that the appropriate middle-way compromise
should instead have been “Lotus Flower Treasury Adornment
Ocean of Worlds Chapter” (處中應云蓮華藏莊嚴世界海品 T35n1735_
p0578c07–9.)
Although I do not go quite that far in emending the SA translation
team’s rendering of the title, I do feel it is necessary to at least add my
herein bracketed “Ocean of” and “s” (as a pluralizer) to make it clear
to the reader that this is not referring simply to one and only one
world, but rather is referring to “an ocean of worlds.”
85. In his discussion of the title, QL confirms (what is, frustratingly, men­
tioned almost nowhere in all of Chinese Buddhist literature!) that, in
this context, the Sanskrit garbha, what the Chinese text translates as
zang (藏), “treasury,” “storehouse,” “depository,” “receptacle,” etc. is
actually the seed pod of the lotus (蓮華含子之處目之曰藏 T35n1735_
p0578c09–10.)
I generally follow the semi-standard English translation practice of trans­
lating this as “treasury.” Less often, I go ahead and render it with
the botanically accurate but not very poetic “seed pod” or “pod.”
However, in places where this is specifically referring to the lotus
seat platform upon which buddhas and bodhisattvas sit, I often ren­
der this as “dais.”
86. Xiangtai (香臺), literally “fragrant terraces” has long been a standard
literary name for temple buildings such as “Buddha halls,” etc. where
incense is burned for ceremonial purposes.
87. Rizhu (日珠) per BCSD (p. 72) is “sūrya-kānta*” which, per MW (p. 1243,
Column 2) is “a sun-stone or sun-crystal (a kind of crystal supposed
to possess fabulous properties….).”
88. A puṇḍarika is a white lotus flower.
89. HH describes these ancient sacrificial earth works in some detail,
explaining that the first character (壇) refers to the raised earthen
sacrificial platform itself which may be built up to a height of three,
five, seven, or nine or more feet, whereas the second character (墠)
refers to the lower level created around and in front of it by removing
an extensive amount of earth to similar gradations of depth into the
earth. This is clearly a case of the Chinese members of the transla­
tion team substituting a Chinese historical ceremonial analogue for
something similar in the ancient Indian culture from which these
texts originate.

834

The Flower Adornment Sutra
90. Per MW’s entry on khārīka (p. 339, Column 3), this form of the word
means “sown with a Khāri of grain.” Soothill’s DCBT gives: “khārī, a
measure (or hamper) of grain; khārīka, equal to a khārī.”
91. A tāla tree is palymyra palm tree.
92. Here and hereafter, SA is using a seemingly new term, “kṣetra system” (
剎種), time and time again. It is nothing new. Rather it is just an artifi­
cial alternative designation for “world system” (世界種) used here sim­
ply to save space in the condensed context of verse lines.
93. Earlier (at 45b07), this was “Flaming Light of Vajra Jewels” (金剛寶焰光).
94. QL (T35n1735_p0584a04–14) indicates that, due to a scribal error, “fra­
grant ocean called Indra’s Flower Treasury” (香水海名因陀羅華藏) is
erroneously placed here in the Chinese translation of the Sanskrit text.
The text should probably instead read as follows: “Within it, in the very
lowest region, there is a world called Inducing Joyous Delight.”
95. Here the verse is selectively reiterating various shapes of world systems
which were first listed above (42a08–09).
96. “Great Rishi” (大仙) is one of the many titles of the buddhas. I follow this
pronouncement by HH in pluralizing it here: “This is accomplished by
the power of the spiritual superknowledges of all buddhas of the ten
directions and the three periods of time.” (…也就是十方三世一切諸佛神
通力所成就.)
97. I follow HH in judging that “Master Guide” here is intended to be
understood as an honorific title for the Buddha.
98. “The realm of Yama” (閻羅處, almost certainly yamaloka) is a reference to
the realm of the pretas or “hungry ghosts” whom Yama is said to rule.
99. “Turbidities and unwholesome paths” (濁惡) is a radically condensed
verse-line reference to the so-called “five turbidies” (五濁), probably
better rendered as “the five degenerations” (pañcakaṣāya), and “the ten
courses of unwholesome karma” (十惡 / daśa-akuśala-karma-patha).
100. With regard to the perhaps mildly obscure eight-character Chinese
sentence which I translate as, “The turret towers and battlements for
repelling invaders were all lofty and beautiful” (樓櫓却敵，悉皆崇麗),
QL explains that these are two different kinds of structures (not just
one as this sentence might otherwise be read), the former being watch­
towers or turret towers built atop the city walls, and the latter being
separate platforms surrounding the city wall which are built up from
earth. (城上守禦曰櫓,繞城別築土臺曰却敵.)
101. An “ineffable” is a specific huge number defined in Chapter Thirty.
102. Where the text says, “…all those sites of enlightenment came to where
he was,” this becomes difficult for the average person to envision. HH’s
comment on this is: “The sites of enlightenment of all buddhas of the

Endnotes
835
ten directions all came into this site of enlightenment. This is the
sphere of experience in which [all phenomena] become mutually
reflective of each other.” (十方諸佛的道場，都來到 這個道場中。這是互
相交映的境界。)
103. This is likely a reference to the eight difficulties.
104. Of the seven instances where this buddha’s name appears in this
chapter, this is the first of several places where the Chinese text
leaves shan (山), “Mountain,” out of his name, hence my inclusion of
“Mountain” in brackets. (The other places are at 55c08 and at 56b17.)
105. For what I translate here as “non-discriminating wisdom” (無差別智),
BCSD (p. 770) offers asaṃbheda-jñāna. Further support for the “non-
discriminating” translation is provided by the fact that saṃbheda is
also one of thirty-three Sanskrit equivalents he provides for what
clearly is “non-discrimination” (無分別).
106. HH notes that this refers to the Dharma body, the reward body, and
the response bodies, hence my pluralization as “bodies” here: “He
revealed the everywhere manifested bodies of the Buddha—the
Dharma, reward, and response bodies.” (顯示普徧示現佛身—法報應
之身)
107. When first introduced (at 53c29), this kalpa was called “Various
Adornments” (種種莊嚴).
108. As if to explain how this radiance which manifests like clouds could
praise the meritorious qualities of all buddhas, HH notes that,
“Within these clouds of light, there are transformation buddhas.
These transformation buddhas also expound on the sublime Dharma
and proclaim the praises of the meritorious qualities of all buddhas.”
(在光明雲中，有變化佛，化佛又演說妙法，稱揚讚歎諸佛功德。)
109. QL makes it clear that this is referring to three things when he says
(at T35n1735_p0587b07–09): “As for number four [of these ten], there
is no kṣetra not entered, no dharma not illuminated, and no view
not purified. This constitutes vigor’s broadening of the many prac­
tices. Explained in accordance with the meaning of the grounds, this
involves the use of all the factors of enlightenment to burn up end­
less delusions and produce boundless radiance.” (四無剎不入,無法不
照,無見不淨.是為精進增廣眾行.約地義釋,以諸道品,燒無盡惑,成無邊光.)
110. An araṇya is a forest or otherwise secluded hermitage dwelling usu­
ally associated with solitary cultivation of dhyāna samādhi or other
specialized practices requiring solitude for their successful develop­
ment.
111. Here, both HH and QL explain “the two types of actions” as
referring to actions obstructed by two types of obstacles, the

836

The Flower Adornment Sutra
affliction-associated obstacles (kleśa-āvaraṇa) and cognition-associated
obstacles (jñeya-āvaraṇa).
112. Here, the BB translation instead has: “He had reached a completely
penetrating comprehension of the nature of dharmas.” (了達法性.)
113. In his commentary on the same passage in Chapter Thirty-Eight, QL
says: “This refers to all buddhas having three matters in which they
are no different, namely: 1) The knowledge on which they rely is the
same; 2) Their aspiration to benefit beings is the same; and 3) The
actions which their reward bodies and transformation bodies perform
are the same. (謂諸佛有三事無差。一所依智同。二益生意樂同。三報化作業
同。L130n1557_p0076a06)
114. “The Dharma that cannot be overturned” (不可轉法 / apratyudāvartya-
dharma [BCSD, p. 0037]) refers to the Dharma’s invulnerability to being
refuted by non-Buddhist polemicists. As it happens, the BB translation
instead has: “He possessed the irreversible Dharma” (具不退法) which
would seem to refer more to having achieved the realization from
which one cannot fall back.
115. “The stage of having but one more birth” (一生補處 / eka-jāti-pratibaddha
[BCSD, p. 0013]) refers to the stage in a bodhisattva’s cultivation where
he is destined to realize buddhahood in his very next life.
116. The SA text here and in the nine following cases streamlines his trans­
lation by saying only “paid reverence” (作禮) which does not conjure
an image of faithful veneration in English. Hence I follow the BB trans­
lation’s more literal “bowed down in reverence” (頭面禮足).
117. Sino-canonical explanations of the Chinese transliteration of the
Sanskrit explain this as meaning “Īśvara’s Sound,” hence “Sovereign
Sound,” hence my back-translation to “Īśvaradhvana.”
118. I emend the text here to insert this name, thus bringing the number
of names to the usual ten, this in accordance with two other editions
(Ming, Gong).
119. I emend the text here to insert eight missing names, this in accordance
with three other editions (Yuan, Ming, Gong).
120. For those who may wonder why I do not translate si shengdi (四聖諦) as
“the four holy truths” or as “the four noble truths” this is because “holy
truths” and “noble truths” are both mistranslations. These truths are
not now and have never been “holy” or “noble,” or at least that is not
what is meant by the term. Rather, these truths are only truly realized
as true by those who have realized the fruits of the path and that is
why they are called “the truths of the āryas.” Everyone else, including
even a monk who has been meditating hard for forty years but still has
not attained any of the fruits of the path is what is called a pṛthagjana (

Endnotes
837
凡夫), or “foolish common person” who still has only understood the
meaning of the four truths intellectually, that is to say, as a theoreti­
cal proposition the truth of which is only directly known by those
who are āryas.
121. This character (聚), as verified by BCSD (p. 0958) is an alternate trans­
lation for the aggregates (skandha), a fact which QL corroborates: “As
for ‘the aggregates,’ this refers to the suffering of the five flourishing
aggregates.” (五盛陰苦也. / T35n1735_p0593c05–06)
122. QL: “Like a thorn which has not yet been pulled out.” (如刺未拔. /
T35n1735_p0593c06)
123. The Chinese here (依根) is mildly ambiguous. The most obvious
meaning is as a reference to the six sense faculties as supports for
their corresponding consciousnesses. Alternatively, it could refer to
the three unwholesome roots (三根) of greed, hatred, and delusion.
HH interpreted in terms of the latter, saying it refers to “suffering
produced in reliance on the roots of karmic offenses.” (依照罪根而生
的苦.)
124. HH: “To proceed toward a place associated with afflictions. This is
analogous to sinking down into the mud and then not being able to
remove one’s legs from it.” (趣向煩惱的地方.這猶如陷在淤泥中，不能
拔出雙腿。)
125. As QL points out (at T35n1735_p0538b08), “ten treasures” (十藏) is a
reference to the topics discussed in Chapter 22 on the ten inexhaust­
ible treasures. Specifically they are: faith, moral precepts, sense of
shame, dread of blame, learning, giving, wisdom, recollection, reten­
tion, and eloquence. (信藏、戒藏、慚藏、愧藏、聞藏、施藏、慧藏、念藏、
持藏、辯藏. / T10n0279_p0111b01–02)
126. Of “partial assessment” (分數), QL says later on in this chapter where
this same binome comes up again, “As for ‘accumulation’ being syn­
onymous with ‘partial assessment,’ if one did not have a single prin­
ciple by which to comprehend (lit. “string together”) [all of] some­
thing, then deluded actions would be of a myriad different sorts.” (集
名分數者無一理以貫之則惑業萬差矣. / T35n1735_p0594a19–20) Hence
this seems to be referring to making judgments based on incomplete
understanding of their consequences.
127. For “attraction” (攝取), HH apparently identifies this with “the four
means of attraction” (四攝法 / catuḥ-saṃgraha-vastu*, per BCSD, p.
283) when, commenting on this, he says, “As for ‘…with attraction,’
[this refers to] attracting beings to go to the pure land of eternal qui­
escence and light.” (或名為攝取：攝取衆生到常寂光淨土去.)
128. QL and HH both equate “directions” with the four truths.

838

The Flower Adornment Sutra
129. The Chinese fenduan (分段) = Sanskrit pariccheda = “individually enti­
tled share,” and, by implication: one’s fate or destiny as resident in and
determined by one’s own physical body with its karmic assets and
vulnerabilities reflected in life span, health, etc. Usually, this is short
for 分段生死 (fenduan shengsi / pariccheda-jarā-maraṇa), one’s individual
karmically delimited circumstance in the context of cyclic existence
(saṃsāra).
130. Of “beckoning enemies” (招引怨), HH says: “All of one’s old enemies
are those one has beckoned forth and are the sorts of sufferings one
should endure.” The point is apparently that one has planted the kar­
mic causes to produce harassment by enemies as the corresponding
karmic result.
131. In a long and somewhat obscure explanation in his QLSC, QL
makes it clear that this “destroying imprints” (破印) is a reference
to the fact that, when a practitioner realizes the truth of cessation,
he completely destroys the karmic imprinting process which other­
wise endlessly brings about future compulsory rebirths in saṃsāra.
(L130n1557_542a05ff).
132. Lest one mistake this as supporting the existence of any inherently
existent fundamental nature to anything at all, HH makes it clear that
this is referring instead to the validity of the path itself: “As for ‘syn­
onymous with the reality of its fundamental nature,’ the fundamental
nature of the path is genuine and it is not false.” (或名為本性實：道的本
性是實在，不是虛妄.)
133. With regard to “the limit of all stations of existence” (諸有邊), HH says:
“As for ‘the limit of all stations of existence,’ one is able to abandon the
three realms and the twenty-five stations of existence and thus reach
their limit.” (或名為諸有邊：能離開三界二十五有，到邊上去.)
134. With regard to “the preservation of what has been conveyed” (受寄全),
QL says: “Karmic actions which have been conveyed to the sphere of
‘accumulation / origination’ (the second of the four truths) are briefly
undergone [as karmic retributions] and then are lost, whereas karmic
actions which have been conveyed to the sphere of ‘the path’ (this
fourth of the four truths) can never be destroyed.” (受寄全者業寄於集蹔
受還亡業寄於道永不可失. / L130n1557_542a05ff)
135. HH says of “purification of discriminations” (淨分別): “As for ‘purified
discriminations,’ this is just the absence of discriminations.” (或名為淨
分別：清淨的分別， 就是沒有分別.)
136. HH says of “a product of numerous factors” (數所成): “This refers to the
suffering arising due to an abundance of delusion and afflictions.” (或名
為數所成：由多數的無明煩惱所成就的苦.) QL identifies these “numerous

Endnotes
839
factors” as referring to conditioned dharmas and also referring to
mental factors. (有為之法總名為數亦心數也. / L130n1557_543a10ff)
137. HH says of “with a container” (或名器): “It is a vessel for holding
afflictions. It is a vessel full of delusions.” (它是裝載煩惱的器皿，它是
盛無明的器皿.)
138. HH identifies “going safely and securely” with “going very safely
and securely to the stages of realization of the āryas.” (很安隱的去到
聖人的果位)
139. HH says of “the ability to plunder and usurp” (能劫奪), that, “This
suffering is like being robbed. It is able to plunder and usurp a per­
son’s wealth. This is just the plundering and usurpation of one’s
prajñā wisdom.” (這個苦好像強盜，能劫奪人的財寳，就是劫奪般若智
慧.)
140. HH: “Suffering forms the deep and thick roots of the afflictions.” (苦
是煩惱深重的根.)
141. HH makes it clear that this is not referring to the metaphysical emp­
tiness of inherent existence (śūnyatā) but rather the spiritual void
which is left in the absence of wisdom: “When one does away with
wisdom, what is left is just suffering.” (把智慧空了，剩下就是苦.)
142. HH: “This accumulation entails swift retribution, the so-called ‘pres­
ent life retribution.’” (這個集很快要受果報，所謂現世現報.)
143. The most obvious explanation here is the traditional one: the seals
of all conditioned things are impermanence, suffering, and non-self.
HH comments: “This is just “complete retention” (the sino-Buddhist
translation of dhāraṇī) in which one gathers all dharmas and retains
all meanings.” (就是總持：總一切法，持一切義。) QL is adequately
cryptic: “As for the path referring to all seals, this is because there is
nothing that is not examined and decided.” (道名一切印無不審決故。)
144. QL: “This is because vast lands are able to grow the trees of immense
suffering.” (廣地生大苦樹故. / L130n1557_546b10) HH: “This refers to
the existence of grounds in which vast afflictions accumulate.” (有廣
大煩惱所聚集的地.)
145. HH: “It is able to lead to the three wretched destinies.” (能趣向三惡
道.)
146. HH: “This refers to the gathering together of afflictions.” (把一切煩惱
攝取在一起.)
147. HH: “The owner of the house of suffering.” (苦宅中的主人.)
148. HH: “The production of all the sufferings associated with the afflic­
tions.” (出生一切煩惱苦.)

840

The Flower Adornment Sutra
149. HH: “The gathering together of the many different sorts of karmic ret­
ributions and their many different sorts of fruits of suffering.” (集會種
種業報種種苦果.)
150. HH: “Suffering is the root of existences in the four wretched destinies.”
(苦是四惡趣的根本.) For those only familiar with “three” wretched des­
tinies, the fourth is the rebirth destiny of the asuras or demigods con­
ceived of as “wretched” due to the dominance in the mind of an asura
of emotions such as jealousy and anger.
151. This is one of the three kinds of suffering, the suffering associated with
the volitional factors (saṃskāra-duḥkha) as the second of the twelve links
of conditioned arising and as the fourth of the five aggregates. HH:
“This refers to the existence of a kind of volitional-factor suffering.” (有
一種行苦.)
152. HH: “The combining of afflictions then produces the truth of accumu­
lation.” (煩惱和合而成集諦)
153. As corroborated by HH, when the Chinese is phrased in this way (受
支), this is an unequivocal reference to “feeling” as the seventh of the
twelve links of conditioned arising. HH: “This just the branch of ‘feel­
ing’ as it occurs in the dharma of the twelve causes and conditions.” (
就是在十二因緣法中的受支.)
154. HH: “The affliction arising from the concept of a self.” (由我心所生的煩
惱.) QL: “As for accumulation being synonymous with the concept of
a self, this is just a reference to the craving associated with having the
view of a [truly existent] self.” (集名我心即我見愛. / L130n1557_549b10)
155. The most obvious meaning of “poison” here would be with reference to
“the three poisons” of greed, hatred, and delusion.
156. “Inapprehensibility” or more literally “unfindability” (不可得) is a ref­
erence to the absence of inherent existence or “emptiness” of all con­
ditioned phenomena. They cannot ultimately be “apprehended” or
“found” as ultimately “real” at all because they are all merely conjunc­
tions of subsidiary conditions.
157. HH identifies this with the seven enlightenment factors (sapta-bodhi-
aṅga): “This refers to the enlightenment factors of the seven enlighten­
ment factors.” (七覺分中的覺分.)
158. HH indicated this is a simile for the ceaseless flowing on of saṃsāra: “As
for ‘synonymous with a rushing stream,’ as one rides along in saṃsāra,
it flows on without ever stopping.” (駛流：駕駛生死流轉不停.)
159. HH: “As for ‘swift destruction,’ this refers to the swift destruction of all
happiness and the increasing of all sufferings.” (或名為速滅：速滅一切
樂,增加一切苦.)

Endnotes
841
160. QL: “As for accumulation’s ‘extending to the end of future time,’ this
is because, if it is not cut off, it is endless.” (集名至後邊者不斷無窮故. /
L130n1557_550b09)
161. HH: “As for ‘a combination of factors,’ this refers to the disorderly
admixture of wholesome and unwholesome. They are all combined.
Where there is both the wholesome and the unwholesome, there is
then the existence of affliction. And where there is the existence of
the afflictions, then there is the existence of karmic obstacles.” (或名
為共和合：善惡混雜在一起，共同和合。有善惡就有煩惱，有煩惱就有業
障.)
162. QL: “As for ‘gateway,’ this is because it leads into the rebirth destinies
characterized by suffering.” (門者入苦趣故. / L130n1557_550b09)
163. QL: “As for ‘ungraspability,’ if one were to grasp at it, then cessation
would not occur.” (滅名不可取取則不滅也. / L130n1557_550b15)
164. HH: “As for ‘turning back and returning,’ this is just ‘turning back
to the origin and returning to the source,’ and turning around and
coming back.” (或名為轉 還：就是返本還原，轉還囘來了.)
165. HH: “As for ’contemplation’ this refers to the ability to contemplate
the true character of all dharmas.” (或名為觀察：能觀察諸法實相.)
166. HH: “As for ‘the ability to defeat enemies,’ this refers to the ability to
vanquish the enemy [consisting] of all sufferings and then gain hap­
piness.” (或名為能摧敵：能摧伏一切苦的敵，而得到快樂.)
167. HH: “As for ‘the ability to enter the nature,’ this refers to the ability
to enter the buddha nature, the ability to understand the buddha
nature.”
DM: For those confused about what is meant by “buddha nature,”
perhaps think of it as “the nature of enlightenability” possessed by
all sentient beings.
168. Jambudvīpa, Pūrvavideha, Godānīya, and Uttarakuru are the names
of the four great continents.
169. The “contaminants” (漏 , 有漏 / sāsrava, āsrava) are usually defined as
either threefold or fourfold: 1) sensual desire (kāma); 2) [craving for]
becoming (bhāva), i.e., the craving for continued existence; 3) igno­
rance (avidyā), i.e., delusion; and 4) [wrong] views (dṛṣṭi). This fourth
type is not included in some listings. Often-encountered alternative
translations include “taints” and “outflows” and, less commonly,
“influxes” and “fluxes.”
170. Lest this “reckoning” seem to be an unusual rendering for shu (數)
(lit. “enumeration, counting, calculation, etc.”), consider QL’s pro­
nouncement on this line: “Whatever has characteristics and differ­
ences is referred to as amenable to reckoning. [However], because

842

The Flower Adornment Sutra
these [five aggregates] are identical to the unconditioned, they are not
dharmas which can be reckoned. If one transcends the sphere of what
can be reckoned and steps beyond the mundane, one realizes the fruit
of quiescence.” (有相差別總名為數即同無為故非數法離數超世成寂靜果. /
L130n1557_564a02–05)
171. “Seeing body and mind as the same” is most likely intended to refer to
them both being empty of any inherent existence of their own.
172. The BB translation’s seven character per line format and rendering is
much clearer here and very helpful in interpreting the real meaning
of the SA translation’s nearly koan-like opacity: “He contemplates the
body and mind as equally devoid of differentiating characteristics and
is completely liberated in all respects both inwardly and outwardly. For
countless koṭīs of kalpas, he abides in non-dual mindfulness. The Well
Gone One is deep, far-reaching, and free of attachments.” (等觀身心
無異相，一切內外悉解脫，無量億劫不二念，善逝深遠無所著。/ T09n0278_
p0424c05–06)
173. As for what is meant by “sicknesses” here, HH says: “They then develop
the many sorts of sicknesses which arise from ignorance and the afflic­
tions.” (就生無明煩惱種種的病.)
174. QL: “The latter half of this verse is concerned with the ability to res­
cue [the aforementioned deluded beings]. Since the Buddha has taught
them the Dharma, [their] right mindfulness then ascends.” (後半能救佛
既授法正念即升也.)
175. With regard to “without perverse intent” (情無異), QL says: “[Wishing]
to become superior to others in terms of reputation and benefits—
this is what is meant by ‘perverse intent.’” (勝他名利名為異情 /
L130n1557_597a13ff)
176. Per MW (p. 4, Column 2), agada means: “free from disease; healthy; free
from affliction; freedom from disease; a medicine, drug, (especially)
antidote.”
177. As for “vairambha winds,” per DCBT: “The great wind which finally
scatters the universe.”
178. The earlier reference to this bodhisattva referred to him as “Foremost
Vigor.”
179. Mangcao (芒草) is a kind of Miscanthus otherwise referred to as silver­
grass which is typically a very tall reed-like grass.
180. “The four impartial minds” (四等) is an alternative designation for the
four immeasurable minds (四無量心) which take all beings equally as
the objects of their kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equa­
nimity.

Endnotes
843
181. It seems that QL interprets “the power of conditions” (緣力) as mean­
ing “the power of ideal personal conditions,” for he defines them
as consisting of “exhortation and instigation provided by the good
spiritual guide.” (緣力謂善友勸發. / L130n1557_695a01).
182. Here, QL defines “the power of objective conditions” as referring to
“the objects of one’s contemplation with compassion and wisdom.”
(所緣力即所觀察悲智之境. / L130n1557_695a01) Hence this would
seem to refer to beings trapped in saṃsāra in need of liberation.
183. Interpreting “roots” as referring to “the five roots” contained within
the thirty-seven enlightenment factors (faith, vigor, mindfulness,
samādhi, and wisdom), QL says: “’Roots’ refers to ‘faith’ and so
forth.” (根謂信等. / L130n1557_695a01ff.)
184. HH follows QL in equating this “reflection” with “assessment of
what one should and should not do.” (十思惟者籌量應作不應作故。/
L130n1557_695a01ff.)
185. These last three are otherwise known as “the three gates to libera­
tion.”
186. This is the Sanskrit for the six perfections of giving, moral virtue,
patience, vigor, meditative skill, and wisdom.
187. These last four are otherwise known as “the four immeasurable
minds.”
188. These are otherwise known as “the ten powers of the Buddha.”
189. The kaśāya robe is a general term for monastic robes which includes
all three of the robes provided to all fully ordained Buddhist monas­
tics.
190. An ācārya is a teaching monk.
191. An upādhyāya is a precept-transmitting and teaching monk.
192. The saṃghāṭī robe is the outer monk’s robe.
193. A willow branch was traditionally used as toothbrush which cleansed
the teeth and freshened the mouth when chewed.
194. “Tin-headed staff” (錫杖) is a reference to a traditional monk’s staff
with metal rings hanging on top which by their jingling serve to
warn away bugs, bears, etc.
195. “Dharma without residue” here refers to the nirvāṇa of a buddha,
the mahāparinirvāṇa wherein all traces of residual karmic defilements
and propensities have been entirely extinguished and one is forever
free of any further compulsory rebirths in saṃsāra.
196. “Dusts,” likely intended here to be considered in the plural, is not
solely a reference to defilement in general, for it is also synonymous
with the objects of the six senses.

844

The Flower Adornment Sutra
197. “Difficulties” here may be construed as referring to the eight difficul­
ties which refer to inopportune rebirths (caused by karmic transgres­
sions): in the hells; among hungry ghosts; as an animal; in the long-
life heavens; in a border region (where the Dharma does not exist); as
deaf, blind, or mute; as one possessed of oratorical skill equipped with
worldly knowledge (but no world-transcending wisdom); and at a time
before or after a buddha appears in the world.
198. I emend the text here based on common sense, context, the BB transla­
tion, the commentary of HH and the testimony of QL by replacing the
“large pillar” (大柱) of the SA text with the “large tree” (大樹) of the BB
translation.” “Tree” is definitely more fitting to the context and “pillar”
would be completely out of context and somewhat strange. QL indi­
cates that the sound of the two words in Sanskrit is nearly identical,
hence the ease of two translators rendering the word with two vari­
ant translation interpretations. HH, having of course read the QLSC
commentary, doesn’t even mention “pillar,” but rather just substitutes
“tree” in both the text and commentary. Even Thomas Cleary translates
this as “large tree.” The soothing and somewhat awestruck feelings
one often experiences when gazing at “a large tree” are very fitting to
the suggested vow: “May all beings abandon selfish and contentious
thought and remain free of anger and hatred.”
199. This is a reference to a buddha’s thirty-two marks and eighty second­
ary signs.
200. Regarding “the Dharma of a single flavor” (一味之法), HH says: “This
is also just the principle of the true character of all dharmas.” (也就是諸
法實相的道理. / HYQS, Digital) This also refers to the often mentioned
idea that all teachings of the Buddha’s Dharma have “the single flavor
of liberation” from saṃsāra.
201. “A grove of ‘sorrowless’ trees” (無憂林) is a reference to the aśoka (“sor­
rowless”) tree under which the Buddha was born (Saraca asoca, a.k.a.
Jonesia asoca Roxb.)
202. “Dhūta austerities” is a reference to a set of usually twelve beneficial
austerities recommended by the Buddha for monastics which include
such practices as eating only one meal each day before noon, wearing
rag robes from a charnel ground, living beneath a tree, living solely on
food attained on the alms round, eating only a specific limited amount
of food, dwelling in a cemetery or charnel ground, only sitting and
never lying down, etc.
203. HH mentions that this is referring to becoming a buddha.
204. Brahmacaryā is usually a reference to pure practice in general and celi­
bacy in particular.

Endnotes
845
205. “The Dharma that is not reliant on a teacher” is an indirect reference
to the utmost, right, and perfect enlightenment realized by all bud­
dhas in their very last birth in which, without a teacher, they redis­
cover the Dharma of all buddhas.
206. “Elixir of immortality,” lit. “sweet dew” (甘露) is the Sino-Buddhist
translation of the Sanskrit amṛta which is the nectar or ambrosia of
the devas.
207. Regarding “understand the equality of the three periods of time” (知
三世等), HH says this refers to: “the ability to understand the cause
and effect of the past, the present and the future.” (能知過去世、現在
世、未來世的因果. HYQS, Digital)
208. This is a reference to the top of the head of a buddha’s subtle body,
the light from which extends so far upward that no one can see the
top of it. This is one of the characteristic signs of a fully enlightened
buddha, the Sanskrit for which is anavolakita mūrdhatā. Hence this
amounts to a wish that all beings will themselves become buddhas
possessed of just such a sign.
209. “Rightward direction” corresponds to what we would now refer to as
“clockwise.”
210. This is a reference to the superknowledge of unimpeded psycho-
physical function (神足通 / ṛddhi-pratihārya), one of the six super­
knowledges.
211. QL says of this: “If it is [enabling progression] toward any other qual­
ities, it is not pure faith.” (向餘德不名淨信. / L130n1557_727b11)
212. Regarding “difficulties,” QL makes it clear that this refers to “the
eight difficulties”: “Those with right faith are not reborn in the eight
difficulties.” (正信之人不生八難. / L130n1557_727b11)
213. Here HH makes it clear that this is a reference to the Dharma body
of the Tathāgata: “If your cultivation has a response, then you always
see the countless buddhas emanating light which draws you forth
and illuminates you and then you are able to see the original essence
of the Tathāgata’s Dharma body forever dwelling in the Dharma
realm, neither coming nor going.” (假設修行有了感應，常見到無量諸
佛放光攝照你，就能見到如來
的法身本體，常住於法界，無來無去。 /
HYQS)
214. The most commonly encountered list of four types of māras consists
of: the māras of the afflictions; the māras of the aggregates; the māra
of death; and the devaputra māras of the sixth desire realm heaven.
Another list cited by HH consists of celestial māras, spirit māras,
ghost māras, and human māras.

846

The Flower Adornment Sutra
215. HH says of “the majestic body possessed of marvelous merit” that:
“This kind of majestic body possessed of marvelous merit is just the
one with the thirty-two marks of a great man.” (這種妙福端嚴身，就是
三十二大人相. / HYQS) Hence it is referring in essence to the future
attainment of buddhahood.
216. The stage of the crown-anointing consecration (灌頂位) corresponds to
the tenth of the ten bodhisattva grounds.
217. HH: “The bodhisattva makes the vow to liberate all beings so that
there is not a single being who fails to reach the stages of fruition and
thus they are all able to reach the complete fulfillment of the fruits of
enlightenment.” (菩薩發願度一切眾生，沒有一個衆生得不到果位，而是都
能得到圓滿. / HYQS)
218. The brahma vihāras are otherwise known as “the four immeasurable
minds” (apramāṇa-citta), namely: kindness, compassion, sympathetic
joy, and equanimity.
219. These are referring to the five faculties, the five powers, and the eight­
fold path.
220. This “abandoning desire through unloveliness” is a reference usually
to the contemplation of the thirty-two or thirty-six parts of the body
or to the contemplation of the nine or ten stages in the dissolution of
a corpse so as to bring about the realization of how undesirable the
human body really is and thus cut off sensual desire (the first of the
five hindrances to deep meditation). This entire category of contempla­
tions is otherwise referred to as “the contemplation of unloveliness”
(asubha-bhāvanā).
221. This is an obvious reference to the eight worldly dharmas (aṣṭa-loka-
dharma) otherwise known as “the eight winds” which include gain and
loss, fame and ill repute, praise and blame, pleasure and pain.
222. Apart from the seemingly obviously intended reference here to the ten
courses of good karmic action, QL also lists five types of beneficial
action reliant on outer purity and five types of beneficial action which
are reliant on inner purity.
223. This is a reference to the superknowledge of unimpeded physical func­
tion (神足通 / ṛddhi-pratihārya), one of the six superknowledges.
224. The BB translation has: “Or they may show the right road to beings
confused about the path.” (迷道眾生示正路. / T09n0278_p0435c22)
225. The “fivefold heat” refers to an ascetic practice of staying out under the
sun surrounded by bonfires burning in each of the four directions.
226. I emend the reading of the text here by replacing yi (已), the past-tense
marker, with ji (己), “self, one’s own, etc.,” this to correct a fairly obvi­
ous graphic-similarity scribal error. Cbeta has already emended this in

Endnotes
847
QL’s QLSCHB, but has neglected to do so in the Sutra itself. The cor­
rectness of this emendation is nicely buttressed by the BB translation:
“…while never becoming neglectful of reflecting on right Dharma.” (
思惟正法不放逸. / T09n0278_p0436a07)
227. This can also refer to standing on tiptoes. HH mentions both.
228. “Eight kinds of beings” is a reference to eight kinds of spiritual beings
usually present in Mahāyāna scriptures as dharma protectors: devas,
nāgas/dragons, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and
mahoragas.
229. The four floods are desire, [wrong] views, existence, ignorance.
230. This “teacherless path” or “path not reliant on a teacher” is a refer­
ence to the utmost, right and perfect enlightenment realized by all
buddhas in their very last birth where, without a teacher, they redis­
cover the Dharma of all buddhas.
231. An araṇya is a forest dwelling usually associated with solitary culti­
vation of dhyāna samādhi.
232. HH: “It causes the wisdom associated with the six faculties to become
unimpededly interpenetrating. This is just the sphere of cognition in
which the six sense faculties attain mutually interactive function­
ing.” (令六根智慧互相通達無礙，這就是六根互用的境界. / HYQS)
233. The BB translation specifies countless buddhas as those who are
expounding the dharma from each and every pore: “From each and
every pore, countless buddhas each proclaim the inconceivable sub­
lime Dharma….” (一一毛孔無量佛，各說妙法難思議…. / T09n0278_
p0438a09 – 10)
234. QL makes it clear that this is referring to the name of the samādhi:
“This is also known as ‘manifestation’ samādhi.” (亦是出現三昧. /
L130n1557_760b02)
235. “In or beyond training” (學無學 / śaikṣa-aśaikṣa) is a reference to those
on the various levels of attainment of the four fruits of the arhat’s
individual liberation path. Of the four, only the arhat is “beyond
training” (aśaikṣa).
236. Here I prefer to back-translate to the Sanskrit “dhāraṇī” rather than
retain the Chinese attempt to translate it (總持) as what comes out
in English as “complete retention.” A dhāraṇī is a formula of spiritu­
ally potent sacred syllables (usually in Sanskrit) that may constitute
either a protective or power-invoking mantra or a magically effica­
cious set of Sanskrit phrases by which one acquires the power to
never forget any Dharma teachings one receives, this even after the
passage of countlessly many ensuing lifetimes.

848

The Flower Adornment Sutra
237. Unlike the very straightforward BB translation (“She is able to cause
beings to gain eloquence” [能令眾生得辯才] / T09n0278_p0439b21), a
literal rendering of the SA translation would come out with the some­
what hard-to-envision statement: “She enters their bodies and pro­
duces marvelous eloquence.” (入彼身中生妙辯. / T10n0279_p0078c19)
238. HH identifies these “five bonds” (五縛 / panca-bandhana [BCSD, p. 90])
as consisting of greed, hatred, delusion, arrogance, and doubt: “…
these are just greed, hatred, delusion, arrogance, and doubt, the ropes
of these five kinds of fundamental afflictions…” (就是貪瞋癡慢疑五種
基本煩惱的繩子 / HYQS) Apparently the asuras depend on having these
bonds as more or less a fundamental part of their raison d’etre, without
which they would become useless in battle.
239. According to the BB translation, this should probably rather be “the
leviathan of saṃsāra.” (入於生死摩竭口.) / T09n0278_p0440a01)
240. This almost unbelievably dramatic analogy for the power and volume
of each rain drop out on the ocean is even more specific in the BB trans­
lation which says: “Each and every drop of rain is like the axle of a
cart.” (一一雨渧如車軸.) / T09n0278_p0440c22)
241. I follow HH here in construing this line to be referring to “relinquish­
ing the form and perception aggregates” rather than to “relinquishing
any conception of forms,” (perhaps an equally valid reading). Here,
HH says, “If, from among the five aggregates, one is able to relinquish
the form dharmas and the perception aggregate, thus ‘making empty
[of inherent existence]’ all dharmas among the five aggregates, then
one will not be covered over by the five aggregates, whereupon one
will then be able to see the Dharma body of the Tathāgata.” (若能把五
蘊中的色法和想陰捨離。把五蘊一切法都空了，而不為五蘊所遮蓋，就能見
到如來的法身. / HYQS)
242. Regarding the first two perhaps slightly confusing lines of this qua­
train (“Having nothing that one sees is what constitutes seeing. Thus
one is able to see all dharmas.”), HH says: “As for ‘having nothing that
one sees,’ this is just not having the seeing of the foolish common per­
son which uses a discriminating consciousness. Here, this is just the
seeing of the āryas’ originally existent wisdom. Where one has a dis­
criminating consciousness, this is [the realm of] all conditioned dhar­
mas. Where one uses nondiscriminating wisdom, this is [is the realm
of] all unconditioned dharmas. The wisdom of the āryas is able to
understand all worldly and world-transcending dharmas. This is just
the complete comprehension of the true character of all dharmas, thus
being free of any attachment to dharmas. Then one is able to see all
dharmas. If with regard to dharmas, one has the foolish common per­
son’s discriminating knowledge and vision, then one will never be able

Endnotes
849
to understand the fundamental substance of all dharmas.” (無見就是
沒有凡夫那種分別識的見。這就是聖人本有智慧的見。 有分別的識，是
一切有為法；無分別的智，是一切無為法。聖人的智慧，能明白世出世間一
切法，也就是了達諸法實相，而沒有法的執著， 才能見到一切法。在法上
若有凡夫分別那種知見，就永遠不會明白一切法的本體。 / HYQS)
243. Both QL and HH identify these as sixfold: the characteristic of know­
ing, the characteristic of continuity, the characteristic of grasping,
the characteristic of assigning names, the characteristic of generating
karmic actions, the characteristic of karma-bound suffering.
244. Both QL and HH identify these as threefold: the characteristic of
karmic action, the characteristic of subject-based perception, and the
characteristic of an objective realm.
245. HH explains this as: “[The intention] to enable beings to become
securely established on the path to the awakening of bodhi. (令眾生
安住在菩提覺道上. / HYQS)
246. Regarding the perhaps somewhat opaque “devoid of any function­
ing,” QL interprets this as in essence owing to the fact that all dhar­
mas are empty of any inherent existence of their own, thus implic­
itly asking, “If they don’t even exist, how could they function? His
pronouncement however is much more terse than that, as follows:
“As for ‘devoid of any functioning,’ this is because they only exist
on the basis of conditions. Hence, because, in each successive mind-
moment, they are impermanent, they are ‘devoid of any function­
ing.’” (無作者但緣有故由念念無常故無造作. / L130n1557_0845a11ff)
247. QL interprets this “incalculability” (不可量) of beings as referring to
their ultimately being beyond the grasp of two kinds of perception
or assessment (出二量), that is to say, beyond either direct percep­
tion or inferential perception and as also referring to their being
beyond either calculability or incalculability (又過量無量故). After
saying in his commentary: “As for ‘incalculability,’ this is because
they exceed [the grasp of] of two types of perception…(不可量者出
二量故), he clarifies this in his subcommentary by saying, “When it
is said that ‘they exceed [the grasp of] two types of perception,’ this
is because they cannot be assessed by either direct assessment or
inferential assessment. It is also because they transcend both calcula­
bility and incalculability.” (出二量者現量比量不能量故又過量無量故. /
L130n1557_0845a02ff)
248. HH explains this as referring to the ability to enable countless beings
to enter the bodhisattva path. (能令無數眾生趣入菩提道. / HYQS)
249. My insertion of the words “perhaps,” “may,” and “or” in the first
thirty-five verses (86a01–86c12) is in order to accurately reflect the
tenor of the text which these verses are intended to reiterate, namely

850

The Flower Adornment Sutra
the text at the beginning of the chapter (84a26–84b01) which initially
introduces and explains the first of the ten abodes, “the abode of initial
generation of the resolve.”
250. “Rings of mountains” is a reference to the all-encircling ring-like ranges
of mountains at the periphery of each world.
251. The BB translation of this quatrain seems clearer: “They are well able
to completely comprehend the abode of the Dharma Kings and accord
with the Dharma Kings’ protocols for the awesome deportment. They
know well how to become established in and enter the position of the
Dharma Kings and they know well how to distinguish the realms of
the Dharma Kings.” (善能了達法王處，隨順法王威儀法，善知安入法王
位，善知分別法王界。T09n0278_p0448c05 – 06)
252. “Brahman conduct” (梵行) or “brahmacarya” is usually a reference to
pure spiritual practice in general and celibacy in particular.
253. If “mass of worms” (蟲聚) seems unintuitive, this actually follows very
logically from the previous item (“a corpse”). The immediately proxi­
mate association may well have arisen from what one sees when doing
the nine or ten standard “unloveliness” (aśubha) contemplations of the
human body as a corpse, a practice which was usually done in a char­
nel ground where, before too long, the dead bodies inevitably become
full of maggots, etc. Moreover, the concept of the body as a home for
countless bacteria, etc. was already well-known to the Buddha and the
monastic community.
254. QL clarifies the meaning of this “establishing speech” (安立說) as mean­
ing “conventionally established” (假施設 / prajñapti).
255. HH follows QL in adding: “Is it non-compliance that is the Dharma? Or
is it having nothing that is apprehensible that is the Dharma?” (不隨順
是法耶無所得是法耶.) QL’s rationale for this addition is basically that,
since all of these sets of questions are ten-fold and only this one set of
questions is eight-fold, these two questions must have been acciden­
tally dropped at some point from the Sanskrit text. It is unclear where
QL sourced his emendations. There is nothing in the BB translation to
support them.
256. The “three clarities” (三明) or trividya are the heavenly eye, cognition of
past lives, and cessation of the contaminants.
257. The “six spiritual superknowledges” (六通 or 六神通) refers to unim­
peded bodily action, the heavenly eye, the heavenly ear, cognition of
others’ thoughts, recall of the previous lives of self and others, and ces­
sation of the contaminants.
258. As SA translates it, one could as easily think it was saying: “This world
does not move and those worlds do not change.” (此世不移動，彼世不改

Endnotes
851
變。 / T10n0279_p0088c12 – 13), and in fact that is how HH explained
it in his HYQS. However, both QL and BB make it clear that this is
referring instead to time. BB’s translation is: “This period of time
does not go to that period of time and that period of time does not
go to this period of time.” (此世不至彼世，彼世不至此世。 / T09n0278_
p0449b23)
259. Although It is not immediately clear from the Chinese text of either
the SA or BB translations precisely what is meant by “to pervade all
worlds,” I follow HH who explains that it is “to enable the Dharma of
the Buddha to fill up all worlds.” (為令佛法充滿所有一切世界的緣故。
HYQS)
260. QL equates this somewhat obscure “non-kalpa” with “the noumenon”
(理) which in the Sino-philosophical terminology of the Huayan her­
meneutic tradition is simply a reference to “emptiness.” So, in effect
this is saying that all kalpas are synonymous with emptiness and
emptiness is synonymous with all kalpas. Perhaps the BB transla­
tion is at least slightly less refractory to easy understanding: “To
know all kalpas enter the nonexistence of a kalpa and the nonexis­
tence of a kalpa enters all kalpas.” (知一切劫入無劫，知無劫入一切劫. /
T09n0278_p0451a21 – 22)
261. I use “right and fixed position” here to render zhengwei (正位), the
usual Sanskrit antecedent for which is samyaktva-niyāma which in
turn correlates to a position of irreversibility in relation to eventually
reaching the endpoint of the path.
262. “Inclinations” (欲樂) is one of SA’s standard translations for the
Sansksrit āśaya which has a range of meanings not so easily captured
in a single English translation. In its various occurrences in this and
related scriptures, it seems to best be rendered into English as “inten­
tions,” “aspirations,” “dispositions,” or “inclinations.”
263. The intent of the Chinese (心) is ambiguous as to whether this is
referring to beings’ “minds” or beings’ “thoughts.” Here I translate
this as “thoughts” following HH who, in his HYQS, twice specifies
“thoughts in the minds” (心念) of beings.” QL agrees, noting that this
refers specifically to the power to have “the knowledge of others’
thoughts.” (知心義兼王所即他心智. / L130n1557_0028a13)
264. As explained by HH and as is standard in all primary Buddhist tradi­
tions, “the hindrances” refers to the five hindrances interfering with
success in the practice of meditation which consist of sensual desire,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, agitation and regretfulness, and
afflicted doubtfulness.
265. As explained by HH, “the obstacles” refers to either two obstacles
(affliction obstacles and obstacles to knowledge) or three obstacles
(affliction obstacles, karmic obstacles, and retribution obstacles).

852

The Flower Adornment Sutra
266. A saṃghārama is a monastic residence and/or monastery.
267. An upaniṣad is usually explained as the smallest particle of matter clos­
est to being just empty space.
268. “Kalpas of existence” (住劫) is usually defined as a period of twenty
small or middle-size kalpas in the life span of a world system during
which beings exist, this occurring between the equally long periods
of the formation of the kalpa and the destruction of the kalpa. Before
and after each of these threefold phases of formation, existence, and
destruction, there is an equally long twenty-kalpa period of complete
nonexistence of anything at all.
269. As for “dharma realms” (法界 / dharma-dhātu), in this context, it would
refer to any objects of mind, that is to say, it refers to anything within
the sphere of the eighteen dharma realms consisting of the six sense
faculties, the six sense objects, and the six sense consciousnesses.
270. Although usually explained in most dictionaries as referring to the
hells, hungry ghosts, animals, humans, and devas, for “the five des­
tinies,” HH here explains them as referring to the rebirth destinies of
the hells, hungry ghosts, animals, asuras, and humans, substituting
“asuras” for “devas,” most likely because rebirth in the deva realms is
not usually much associated with easily perceptible suffering.
271. “The Most Revered of Beings” is literally “the Most Revered of Two-
Footed Beings” (兩足尊 / dvipadottama, etc.), one of the honorific epithets
of the Buddha which specifically refers to his superiority among all
humans and devas. This is also sometimes explained (especially by
HH) as representing the Buddha’s twofold repletion in merit and wis­
dom, hence it may sometimes also be translated as “Doubly Replete
Honored One.”
272. Merit and wisdom (puṇya and jñāna) are the two “provisions for enlight­
enment” (bodhisaṃbhāra) essential for attaining buddhahood.
273. This is a reference to the Buddha’s ability to speak with a single voice
and have everyone hear him speaking directly to them, addressing
their own specific causes and conditions.
274. This is the first of six stanzas having to do with this bodhisattva’s
knowledge of the ten powers of the buddha.
275. Here, what looks like “the four equalities” (四等) is an abbreviation for
“the four equal minds” (四等心) which is just an alternative Chinese
rendering of “the four immeasurable minds” (四無量心 / apramāṇa-
citta), namely: kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity,
so-called because the bodhisattva strives to maintain them all in equal
measure toward all beings.

Endnotes
853
276. “The stations of absorption” (諸定處) here is a reference to the four
formless absorptions (limitless space, limitless consciousness, noth­
ing whatsoever, and neither perception nor non-perception).
277. Here, clearly, the very same term, “bodhi mind” (菩提心 / bodhicitta)
or “resolve to attain bodhi” is in effect a play on words, for it is refer­
ring to it in its already fully realized and fully enlightened state as
“the enlightened mind.” That is to say, it is not referring to it when
it is still merely aspirational when of course it would have no such
powers of cognition as to know every detail throughout the ten
directions, etc.
278. The text is referring here to the pleasures arising in association with
particular components of the five roots and the five powers, specifi­
cally that arising from vigor and from concentration. The five roots
and five powers both consist of: faith, vigor, mindfulness, concentra­
tion, and wisdom.
279. Emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness are the bodhisattva’s
“three gates to liberation.” They are also known as “the three
samādhis.”
280. In accordance with four alternative editions (S, Y, M, G), Li Tong
Xuan’s HYHL QL’s HYSC, HH’s HYQS, I emend the reading of
the Taisho text here by replacing shen (身), “person,” with xin (心),
“resolve.”
281. “Right and definite position” (正位 / samyaktva-niyama, samyaktva-
niyāma, or just niyāma) refers to the position of irreversibility on the
bodhisattva path from which one can never fall back or retreat. It
also has a similar meaning of “stage of irreversibility” for those on
the individual-liberation path to arhatship.
282. Although HH makes a passing reference to “difficulties” (諸難) here
as referring to “disasters” (災難), especially in such close proximity
to the three wretched destinies, this is also a fairly clear reference to
the eight difficulties (八難) which refer to inopportune rebirths: in
the hells; among hungry ghosts; as an animal; in the long-life heav­
ens; in a border region (where the Dharma does not exist); as deaf,
blind, or mute; rebirth as one possessed of oratorical skill tethered
to merely worldly knowledge; and rebirth at a time before or after a
buddha appears in the world.
283. An upādhyāya is a very senior member of a monastic community, usu­
ally one serving as a preceptor or instructor of other monks.
284. An ācārya, generally speaking, is a senior teacher of monastics. More
specifically, he is the senior instructor of the precepts in the context
of a formal monastic ordination.

854

The Flower Adornment Sutra
285. “Good spiritual guide” or “good spiritual friend” translates the Sanskrit
kalyāṇamitra which is a term used in the prior case to refer to one who is
senior in the spiritual path and who serves as one’s primary spiritual
guide, teacher, or advisor. In the latter case, this is a term of reference
for one’s peers in the cultivation of the path.
286. The “emblematic seals” or “characteristic aspects” (nimitta-mudrā) of all
dharmas vary in their enumerations, in most cases varying between
three and five. The initial list of five per QL are: impermanence, suffer­
ing, emptiness, non-self, quiescence.
287. “Wishlessness” (apraṇihita) is the third of the three gates to liberation
(emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness) by which, through realiz­
ing that all dharmas are impermanent and conducive to suffering, one
views all dharmas without any aspirations for involvement with them.
288. QL: “When, having accomplished the exertional practices (prayoga), a
single perfection embodies all ten [perfections], this is what is meant
by ‘great adornment.’” (成加行一度具十名大莊嚴 / L130n1557_p0067b13)
Hence this is referring to a very advanced and well integrated level of
practice of the pārāmitās.
289. QL: “Because one’s wisdom tallies with the true character [of dharmas]
(dharmatā), one does not [simply] accord with [the statements of] oth­
ers.” (智契實相故不隨他 / L130n1557_p0067b13)
290. Although the text refers simply to “good friends” (善友), this is a stan­
dard reference to one’s kalyāṇamitra, or “good spiritual guide.”
Additionally, as the Buddhabhadra translation directly implies
with “true good spiritual guide” (真善知識 / T09n0278_p0459c29), this
is obviously intended to connote first and foremost one’s own guru,
or “good spiritual friend” (kalyāṇamitra) and, only secondarily, those
other good spiritual friends with whom one is associated in joint prac­
tice of the path.
Finally, HH makes this quite clear here: “One must serve one’s good
spiritual guide, draw near to one’s good spiritual guide, and make
offerings to one’s good spiritual guide. One must obey the instructions
of one’s good spiritual guide and obey the guidance of one’s good spir­
itual guide.” (要承事善知識、親近善知識、 供養善知識。要聽善知識的教
化，聽善知識的指導。 / HYQS)
291. If perhaps “one’s mind has no place in which it dwells” (心無所住) seems
somewhat obscure, QL is helpful: “As for ‘not dwelling in Dharma
gateways,’ ‘dwell’ has two faults: The first is that one fails to tally with
the wisdom of the ground. The second is that one is unable to advance
any farther. ‘Not dwelling’ is the opposite of this.” (不住法門住有二失一
不契地智二不能進趣不住反此. / L130n1557_p0069b13)

Endnotes
855
292. The BB translation and HH both clarify that “good people” here
refers specifically to the good spiritual guide (善知識). BB: “They
always delight in drawing near to and relying upon good spiritual
guides.” (四者、常樂親近依善知識。 / T09n0278_p0460a29–b01) HH:
“The bodhisattva is always able to acquire a good spiritual guide to
serve as one on whom he can rely.” (菩薩能常常得到善知識作為依靠…
/ HYQS)
293. HH clarifies: “The bodhisattva knows of all dharmas that, although
they differ, still their fundamental substance is the same. They are
not of two different sorts. (菩薩知道一切 法，雖然不同。但是本體平
等，沒有兩樣。 / HYQS)
294. “Complete retention” (總持) is the Chinese translation of the Sanskrit
dhāraṇī. Aside from their association with spells and spiritual
powers, dhāraṇīs constitute a mechanism by which dharmas, once
learned, are retained forever and never forgotten, even after count­
less lifetimes.
295. Although the literal translation of the Chinese is “impurity,” the
Sanskrit is aśubha, “unloveliness.” This refers to a set of contempla­
tions by which one understands the utterly undesirable nature of
the human body for the sake of neutralizing delusion-based sen­
sual desire. Typical contemplations include the contemplation of the
thirty-two or thirty-six parts of the body, the nine or ten contempla­
tions of the stages in the deterioration of a corpse, the white-boned
skeleton contemplation, and so forth.
296. HH: “For beings with abundant delusion, one teaches them the
dharma of causes and conditions, the contemplation of the twelve-
fold chain of causes and conditions, and the cultivation of the Dharma
gateway of causes, effects, and karmic retributions so that they can
rid themselves of ignorance and then put an end to saṃsāra.” (對愚
癡多的衆生，為其說因緣的法。觀十二因緣，修行因果報 應的法門。除無
明，則了生死。 / HYQS)
297. The three sufferings (duḥkha) are: the suffering of physical and mental
pain (duḥkha-duḥkha), the suffering inherent in change (vipariṇāma-
duḥkha); and the suffering inherent in the karmic formative factors
(saṃskāra-duḥka).
298. I follow QL’s analysis of the correct division of these ten subtopics.
(Here, Cbeta’s imposition of western-style punctuation contradicts
it.)
299. Although “seals of the Dharma” would ordinarily refer, depend­
ing on the tradition, to categories such as impermanence, suffering,
non-self, and emptiness, HH mentions in passing the need to not

856

The Flower Adornment Sutra
contradict “the true character of dharmas,” i.e. dharmatā, as a seal of all
dharmas. (不可違諸法印實相。 / HYQS)
300. QL points out that “attachments” here refers to attachment to [the
inherent existence] of persons and dharmas.
301. This is usually a reference to the nine sequential meditative absorp­
tions, namely: the four dhyānas, the four formless realm absorptions,
and the absorption in which both perception and feeling are entirely
extinguished. This last one is otherwise referred to as the complete ces­
sation absorption.
302. The samāpattis are usually interpreted as referring to the four dhyānas
and the four formless absorptions.
303. QL points out that this “emblematic seal of dharmas’ true character,”
(dharmatā), is referring to true suchness (tathatā): “As for ‘If he skillfully
contemplates’ and so forth, this is referring to the wisdom arising from
cultivation. This sentence is referring to awakening to and entering
suchness.” (善觀下皆是修慧此句悟入於如. / L130n1557_p0083a09)
304. Both QL and HH point out that this is a reference to the twelve links of
conditioned co-production. “The continuing on of cyclic existence” (流
轉) is a reference to the means by which the twelve links of conditioned
arising ensure that cycle’s continuation in endless saṃsāra. “Returning
to a state of cessation” (還滅) is a reference to how understanding and
breaking the cycle of the twelve links culminates in the realization of
nirvāṇa.
305. “Complete retention” reflects the Chinese translation of dhāraṇī (總持),
a concept which often includes not just the remembrance of immense
treasuries of Dharma across countless lifetimes, but also the esoteric
formulae used to assist in this and other cultivation-associated skills.
306. Although HH explains “difficulties” here as referring to “all kinds of
disasters and difficulties” (一切災難), QL refers specifically to “the eight
difficulties,” namely: existence in the hells; among hungry ghosts; in
the animal realm; in the heavens where circumstances are so blissful
that there is no motivation to cultivate the path even as one’s merit
runs out and one becomes bound to fall down again into realms beset
by suffering; in regions such as the continent of Uttarakuru in which,
although circumstances may be pleasant, Dharma is non-existent; exis­
tence as one who is blind, deaf, or mute; existence as one possessed of
oratorical skill tethered to merely worldly knowledge; and being born
at a time between buddhas in which there is no Dharma in the world.
307. Per HH, “Enabling them to practice equal regard for others” refers
to “enabling them to cultivate the kindness and compassion contem­
plations, to practice the dharma of equal regard, and to realize that

Endnotes
857
‘others’ and ‘self’ are of a single substance.” (令修慈悲觀，行平等法，
人我一體。 / HYQS)
308. Of the two most fundamental, essential, and interdependent aspects
of all systems of Buddhist meditation practice (śamatha, “calm abid­
ing,” and vipaśyanā, “insight meditation”), vipaśyanā is that non-dis­
cursive insight-generating contemplation of phenomena which leads
to wisdom and realizations.
309. The “six dharmas of harmony and respect” (六和敬法) are six points
of common identity formulated by the Buddha as essential standards
within the monastic Sangha. They refer to cultivation of the same
moral precepts, sharing a common understanding of the same views,
abiding in the same sorts of physical dwelling circumstances, main­
tenance of mutual non-contentiousness in verbal actions, maintain­
ing mutually-pleasing mental behaviors, and maintaining universal
equality in the distribution of benefits provided to the Sangha.
310. In Sanskrit, sudarśana.
311. Again, “difficulties” here is clearly a reference to the eight difficul­
ties.
312. Although it would be possible to construe this line as referring to that
which is counted and the person who counts, QL clarifies that this
is referring to whatever is counted on the one hand and the num­
bers used to keep track of them on the other: “Apart from the things
which are counted, there is no number able to count them.” (離所數
物無能數數. / L130n1557_0118a10)
313. QL specifies: “The first line of the first verse is a general analogy to
the one mind.” (初偈初句總喻一心 / L130n1557_0126a14)
314. The BB translation’s slightly more specific phrasing says: “This is
because the bodhisattva-mahāsattva trains in the dharmas practiced
by all buddhas of the three periods of time.” (菩薩摩訶薩學三世諸佛
所行法故。/ T09n0278_p0466b25–6)
315. As for what I translate here as “perception of a composite being” (種
種想), QL clarifies that this refers to the concept of a being consisting
of “the causes and conditions of the aggregates, sense realms, sense
bases, and so forth.” (陰界入等諸因緣 / L130n1557_0150a11)
316. Per MW, māṇavaka refers to “a youth, lad, fellow; a pupil, scholar,
religious student,” etc.
317. QL explains this as referring to “failing to cherish one’s roots of good­
ness.” (不惜善根 / L130n1557_0163b14)
318. “Right and definite position” (正位 / samyaktva-niyāma) is a technical
term referring to a level of realization from which one cannot fall

858

The Flower Adornment Sutra
back and in which successful culmination of one’s path is a future cer­
tainty.
319. Per MW (p. 823, Column 1), “muni” (牟尼) refers to “a saint, sage, seer,
ascetic, monk, devotee, hermit.” This is also an abbreviation for the
name of Śā kyamuni Buddha. It is also synonymous with the word
“buddha.”
320. QL explains “ground of the infinite” here as referring to the nirvāṇa
without residue. (L130n1557_0226b08)
321. HH notes that “eyes” here is referring to the wisdom eye.
322. This is referring to pratisaṃkhyā-nirodha.
323. This is referring to apratisaṃkhyā-nirodha.
324. HH equates “the abiding nature of dharmas” (法性住) with “true such­
ness” (眞如) or tathatā.
325. What the Chinese text refers to here as “the four kinds of eloquence,”
is otherwise known as “the four unimpeded knowledges” (catuḥ-
pratisaṃvid).
326. These last seven of these eleven lists (beginning with “the four stations
of mindfulness”) together constitute “the thirty-seven aids to enlight­
enment” otherwise known as “the thirty-seven enlightenment factors”
(saptatriṃśad-bodhi-pakṣikā-dharmāḥ).
327. As for these three list items of “past giving,” “future giving,” and
“present giving” (過去施、未來施、現在施), as will become clear from
their explanations which follow several pages later, “giving” (施) here
is almost certainly translating the Sanskrit tyāga which not only means
“giving” in the sense of generously parting with one’s own posses­
sions, but also means “giving up,” “relinquishing,” “abandoning,”
“forsaking,” etc. What is really being talked about here is “giving up”
or “relinquishing” of any and all attachments to dharmas of the past,
future, and present, hence this should be understood as meaning “giv­
ing up of past dharmas,” “giving up of future dharmas,” and “giving
up of present dharmas.”
328. This sentence lists the twelve kinds of text found in the Buddhist canon.
329. According to QL, bimba (頻婆) means “’a substance that reflects the
body’ which is to say that it is something among the curtain adorn­
ments that displays the reflections of things outside it.” (頻婆者此云身
影質謂帳莊嚴具中現外質之影故. / L130n1557_p0303b10)
330. In translating zizai (自在), more usually “sovereign mastery” etc., as
“magical,” I am assuming the use here to be synonymous with the use
of the spiritual powers (as is very common in the SA translation of the
“Entering the Dharma Realm” chapter).

Endnotes
859
331. Soothill (digital edition) records vimbara as not only a huge number,
but also as “a king of fragrance, or incense.”
332. In translating youxi (遊戲), more literally “playful,” “sporting,” etc. as
“miraculous” I am assuming the Sanskrit antecedent to be the rather
usual (in SA’s translation of the “Entering the Dharma Realm” chap­
ter) “vikurvita,” etc. HH says of these fragrances that: “These kinds of
fragrances are able to take beings’ defiled minds and transform them
into pure minds.” (能將眾生的染汚心轉為清淨心。/ HYQS)
333. According to Soothill (digital edition), a mardala or mṛdaṇga (牟陀羅) is
“a kind of drum described as having three faces.”
334. “Devas from the Light Heavens” (光天) here is a general category
referring to those dwelling in the next three heavens in the list,
namely the Lesser Light Heaven, the Limitless Light Heaven, and
the Light and Sound Heaven.
335. “Devas from the Purity Heavens” (淨天) here is a general category
referring to those dwelling in the next three heavens in the list,
namely the Lesser Purity Heavens, the Limitless Purity Heavens,
and the Universal Purity Heavens.
336. “Devas from the Vastness Heavens” (廣天) here is a general cat­
egory referring to those dwelling in the next three heavens in the
list, namely the Lesser Vastness Heavens, the Limitless Vastness
Heavens, and the Vast Fruition Heavens.
337. Regarding this nearly inscrutably abstruse line, QL says: “The per­
vasive emptiness of dharmas is the realm relied on by the Buddha’s
wisdom body. That is the meaning of ‘throne’ here.” (周徧法空是佛智
身所依之境座之義也. / L130n1557_p0315b03.)
338. As seems to be quite common in its punctuation of T0279, the English-
style punctuation recently added by Cbeta is altogether misleading
here. My translation here follows QL’s very precise narration of sen­
tence breaks which produce ten of these exemplary “meritorious
qualities.” However, unlike the SA translation, the BB translation
(which differs slightly from QL’s interpretation) makes it very clear
where the breaks occur in the content of these ten classes of meritori­
ous qualities by adding “Dharma gateway” (法門) at the end of each
one of them. Here are the ten as they would be divided in the SA
translation if one instead relied on the BB translation’s division of
topics:
1) They roam, unimpeded, to the lands of all buddhas;
2) They see the non-dependent pure Dharma body;
3) They use the wisdom body to manifest countless bodies which
go throughout the ten directions, serving the buddhas;

860

The Flower Adornment Sutra
4) They enter all buddhas’ measureless, boundless, and inconceiv­
able dharmas of sovereign mastery;
5) They dwell in the countless gateways of all-knowledge;
6) They use the light of wisdom to thoroughly understand all dhar­
mas and achieve fearlessness with respect to all dharmas;
7) Whatever they expound upon, they may do so with inexhaustible
eloquence to the very end of future time;
8) With great wisdom, they open the gateway to the complete-reten­
tion [dhāraṇīs};
9) With the purified wisdom eye, they enter the deep Dharma realm;
and
10) Their wisdom’s sphere of cognition is boundless, ultimately
pure, and space-like.”
339. As referenced in the first line of this quatrain, HH identifies “the
Buddha’s body” as synonymous with true suchness and the Dharma
body.
340. HH explains this by pointing out that all of the buddhas’ transforma­
tion bodies are just the one Dharma body.
341. Although, because of the very different definitions for the Chinese
character shi (世) which can mean both “world” and “period of time,”
it would be easy to misconstrue the first two characters of the second
line of this quatrain as referring to “the world,” as QL clarifies, it is
instead referring to the Tathāgata’s “not being moved along by the
three periods of time” (三世不遷故. / L130n1557_p0364b08).
342. Again, because of the very different definitions in Sino-Buddhist
Classical Chinese for the two-character phrase “zhushu” (諸數) which
can mean both “enumerations” and “all conditioned phenomena,” it
would be easy to misconstrue its meaning here. As QL clarifies, it is
referring to the Tathāgata’s “essential nature / body not being of the
class of conditioned things” (體非有為之數故. / L130n1557_p0364b08)
343. This line literally says: “Their number [would be] equal to [the num­
ber of] the thoughts.” (其數與心等。/ T10n0279_p0123b23) I follow QL
in interpreting this somewhat ambiguous fourth line of this verse as
meaning: “However many he thought of, that is how many would then
appear. Therefore it refers to their [number] being ‘equal to what he
intended.’” (隨念隨現故名心等 / L130n1557_p0368a15) HH provides a
different but equally valid interpretation of the line: “This person is
then able to succeed in seeing buddhas, being able to see countless
buddhas, matching the number of beings thoughts, that many.” (HYQS
/ 這個人才能得見於佛，能見到無量的佛，如同眾生心念數那樣之多。)
344. Although what I translate here as “resolve to attain bodhi” is literally
“path resolve” (道心), “path resolve” is just a Sino-Buddhist euphemistic

Endnotes
861
translation of the Sanskrit bodhicitta which does indeed very literally
mean “bodhi resolve.”
345. Again, although the Chinese for what I translate here as “unsur­
passed enlightenment” is literally “unsurpassed path” (無上道),
that “unsurpassed path” is just a euphemist Sino-Buddhist transla­
tion of the Sanskrit anuttara-bodhi which does indeed mean precisely
“unsurpassed enlightenment.”
346. HH interprets “past mindfulness and wisdom” (前際念智) as refer­
ring especially to one’s arousal of the bodhi resolve in earlier life­
times: “As for the meaning of ’past mindfulness and wisdom,’ this
refers to the very first single thought of wisdom. It is also just the
wisdom of the very first single thought of arousing the bodhi resolve.
This single thought of wisdom is never cut off, picking up from and
continuing on forward so that the bodhi resolve you aroused is then
retained forever, becoming even stronger.” (「前際念智」的意思，是指
最初一念的智慧。也就是最初一念發菩提心的智慧。這一念的智慧是永
遠不斷，接連繼續下去，所以你所發的菩提心也是永遠長存而更堅強的。/
HYQS)
347. Both HH and QL interpret this as referring to the wisdom body (慧身)
of the Tathāgata.
348. The title of this sixth dedication is very different later in the chapter
where it is entitled “the dedication to strengthening everyone’s roots
of goodness” (隨順堅固一切善根迴向).
349. As a point of information, all of the other sixty-two mentions of the
name of this dedication have this instance’s “unbound and unat­
tached” reversed to “unattached and unbound,” thereby recording
its name the vast majority of times as “the unattached and unbound
liberation” (無著無縛解脫).
350. Later on, in the actual discussion of this tenth dedication, it is instead
referred to as “the dedication that is as measureless as the Dharma
realm.” (等法界無量迴向。 / T10n0279_p0171a06)
351. “The sun” is personified here as “the solar deva” (日天子).
352. This “hand of an asura” (阿脩羅手) is a reference to Rāhu, the asura
supposed to be responsible for eclipses of the sun and moon.
353. Again, “the sun” is personified here as “the solar deva” (日天子).
354. QL interprets the seven types of wealth as being the first seven of
the ten endless treasuries, namely: faith, moral virtue, a sense of
shame, a dread of blame, learning, giving, and wisdom. (QLSCHB,
L130n1557_0392b09). In his HYQS, HH gives two alternative lists, the
first being “the seven kinds of wealth of the āryas” (七聖財) consist­
ing of: faith, moral virtue, learning, sense of shame, dread of blame,

862

The Flower Adornment Sutra
wisdom, and relinquishment. The other list he gives is “the seven kinds
of Dharma wealth” (七法財) consisting of: faith, vigor, moral virtue,
sense of shame and dread of blame, learning, meditative absorption
and wisdom, and relinquishment.
355. As for refraining from “damaging” the characteristics of the aggregates,
HH mentions “perhaps seeing them as empty” (或空了) as a means by
which this might occur.
356. HH points out that “pure counteractive dharmas” (清淨對治之法) refers
to moral virtue, meditative absorption, and wisdom (戒定慧) with
which one counteracts greed, hatred, and delusion.
357. HH makes a point of clarifying that, “This is not to say that ‘images’
here is referring, say, to real images of people. Rather, they are just
[like] a kind of reflected image, that’s all.” (不是說真的人像的「像」，而只
是一種影像而已。/ HYQS)
358. “Joint endeavors” (同事) here refers to the fourth of the four means of
attractions by which one uses the skillful means of participating in
joint endeavors to attract others into cultivation of the Dharma.
359. The title of this sixth dedication is very different in its initial listing at
the very beginning of this chapter where it is referred to as “the dedica­
tion of roots of goodness that penetrates the equality of everyone.” (入
一切平等善根迴向. / 0124c05-6).
360. Regarding this “dedication of roots of goodness in ways which corre­
spond to the countless and boundless kinds of gifts that he gives,” the
examples which follow go on for approximately the next eighty pages
in the English text and twenty pages in the Taisho Canon’s Chinese text
(ending at 155c15). In fact, they exhaust the remainder of the discussion
of this sixth dedication, “the dedication to strengthening all roots of
goodness” and constitute fully a third of this chapter on the ten kinds
of dedication.
361. The “agada medicine” is a cure-all medicine.
362. “The aggregate of moral precepts” (戒蘊) is one of four “uncontami­
nated” (無漏) or “world-transcending” (出世) aggregates (四蘊) con­
sisting of the aggregate of moral precepts, the aggregate of meditative
absorption, the aggregate of wisdom, and the aggregate of liberations.
363. Here, QL offers the somewhat ambiguous note that: “Accumulating the
abodes of all buddhas refers to those of the āryas, the celestials, the pure,
and so forth.” (攝取一切諸佛所住謂聖天梵等 / L130n1557_p0489a08)
364. Here, QL says, “Later, where it says: ‘One does not abandon the most
supreme abode of the Buddha,’ this refers to dwelling in the room of the
great quiescence.” (後言不捨佛最上住者住大寂室 / L130n1557_p0489a08)

Endnotes
863
365. “Hindrances and entanglements” (蓋纏) is a reference to the five hin­
drances (pañca-nivaraṇāni: desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness,
restlessness and remorsefulness, and skeptical doubt) and the ten
entanglements (daśa-paryavasthānāni: lack of sense of shame, lack of
dread of blame, envy, miserliness, drowsiness, restlessness, dullness,
anger, and concealment).
366. “Solid incense” (堅固香 / kālānusāri-gandha [BCSD, p. 298]), per BHSD,
page 180, column 2, seems most likely to be a kind of sandalwood.
367. “Dāna pāramitā” is the perfection of giving, the first of the six pāramitās
or “six perfections.”
368. “All dharmas have nothing that they do” (一切法皆無所作) is deriv­
ative from the ontological fact that all dharmas are devoid of any
agent of action.
369. I follow Cbeta in preferring on sensibility grounds the reading found
only in the Ming Edition of “become true fields of merit able to
accomplish the fruits [of the path]” (為能辦果真實福田) over the read­
ing found in all other editions of “become true fields of merit able to
distinguish the fruits [of the path]” (為能辨果真實福田). (T10n0279_
p0140b17–18)
370. QL notes: “As for ‘the tenfold path of emancipation,’ this is just the ten
grounds in which one uses the practice of the ten perfections to get
rid of the ten heavy obstacles and abandon the ten kinds of coarse­
ness.” (十出離道者即是十地以十度行出十重障離十麤故. / L130n1557_
p0509a05)
371. Both BB and HH infer strongly that this is intended to refer primarily
to the good spiritual guide or kalyāṇamitra.
372. “Brahmacarya” (梵行) refers to pure spiritual practice in which celi­
bacy is strictly observed.
373. Per DFB (digital edition), referring to the Mahāsatya-nirgrantha-
sūtra, “seven parts” (七支) refers to the four legs, the head, the geni­
tals, and the tail.
374. “Elephant treasure” and “horse treasure” (象寶馬寶) are two of the
“seven treasures” of a wheel-turning sage king (轉輪聖王).
375. Although there are at least several explanations of these “three
kinds of worlds,” HH, presenting the list also used by Fazang in his
Huayan Tanxuanji (華嚴經探玄記 / T1733_0122a15–17), explains the
three kinds of worlds as consisting of: 1) The world of right enlight­
enment; 2) The world of sentient beings; and 3) The “receptacle
world” of inanimate things. (正覺世間, 有情世間, 器世間.) “Receptacle
world” is somewhat metaphoric, as if the inanimate world were like
a “receptacle” or “container” in which sentient beings live.

864

The Flower Adornment Sutra
376. These sixteen knowledges or mind states (ṣoḍaśa-citta) correspond to
eight kinds of patience and eight kinds of knowledge associated with
the four truths. In particular, they refer to sixteen mental states occur­
ring during the path of seeing when cutting off delusions.
377. HH associates this “jewel of the unimpeded purified eye” (無礙淨眼寶)
with the wisdom eye, saying: “The ‘pure eye’ here is just the Dharma
eye.” (清淨眼即是法眼. / HYQS)
378. What I translate here as “prominence on the crown” (頂髻) is the
Buddha’s uṣṇīṣa.
379. This is one of the kinds of fear to which a bodhisattva may be subject,
in this case, a kind of “stage fright” at the prospect of sitting in front
of “the Great Assembly” (大眾). This is a translation into Chinese of
the Sanskrit mahāsaṃgha which is usually used to refer primarily to a
meeting of everyone in any given monastic community. Depending on
the context, it might also refer to a meeting of all monks, nuns, laymen,
and laywomen in any given Buddhist community.
380. “Secondary sign” (隨好, anuvyañjana) here is a reference to one of the
eighty secondary signs exclusive to the body of a buddha.
381. “The tongue that can cover the face” (覆面舌) is one of the physical
signs of a buddha resulting from countless lifetimes of perfectly truth­
ful speech.
382. The BB translation is somewhat more direct: “May all beings be enabled
to acquire the one body that is identical with that of the buddhas of
the three periods of time. (令一切眾生。悉得一身等三世佛。 / T09n0278_
p0510b28–29)
383. The reader is here advised that the following list of dedications associ­
ated with the bodhisattva’s sacrificing his own heart relies entirely on
there being a single word capable of bearing a broad range of meanings
associated with both “heart” and “mind.” Although this works well
enough in Sanskrit with citta and in Chinese with xin (心), this does not
work quite so well when the range of definitions of that Sanskrit word
and the corresponding Chinese character are all borne by the English
word “heart.”
384. Although “nārāyaṇa-garbha” as the Sanskrit antecedent for the Chinese
那羅延藏 is fairly obvious, it is unclear what it is actually intended to
refer to here. Elsewhere in the canon, it is the name of a Buddha. Here
it may mean “womb of a nārāyaṇa,” but because it is uncertain, I pre­
ferred to simply settle for using only the reconstructed Sanskrit.
385. The “three kinds of pure moral precepts” (三種淨戒), otherwise known
as the “the three collections of moral precepts” (三聚戒) or “the three
collections of pure moral precepts” (三聚淨戒) consist of: 1) “The moral

Endnotes
865
precepts of the moral codes” which include the five precepts, the
eight precepts, the ten precepts, the bodhisattva precepts, and the
complete monastic precepts; 2) “The moral precepts of the good
dharmas” which refers to the moral standard requiring the prac­
tice of goodness in all situations, especially as prescribed by the ten
courses of good karmic action; and 3) “The moral precepts of benefit­
ing beings” which refers to practicing goodness in ways that benefit
beings, especially by guiding them to at least follow the five moral
precepts and, better yet, the ten courses of good karmic action.
386. “Unprecedented dharmas” (未曾有法 / adbhuta-dharma) usually refers
to “marvels” or “rarities,” events wrought by the superknowledges,
and so forth. Here, HH equates it with cultivating the complete
absence of thoughts of sexual desire, saying: “As for the so-called
‘unprecedented dharmas,’ this is just purity in body and mind, not
having the behavior in which one has thoughts of desirous craving
or sexual desire, even to the point that one should not have even a
single such thought arise.” (所謂未曾有法，就是身心清淨，沒有貪愛婬
欲的思想行為，甚至應一念不生。 / HYQS)
387. For “sevenfold path of great men” (七丈夫道), both HH and QL men­
tion the existence of multiple lists of which, per QL, the first is: 1)
having a long lifespan and living for a long time; 2) having a wonder­
fully majestic physical form; 3) being free of illness and having but
few afflictions; 4) not being a slave, not being a woman, and not being
a paṇḍaka (a eunuch); 5) having fiercely sharp wisdom; 6) speaking in
a dignified and solemn manner; 7) coming from a great lineage. (一
長壽久住二妙色端嚴三無病少惱四非僕非女非半擇迦五智慧猛利六發言
威肅七有大宗葉) / L130n1557_0560a11)
388. The BB translation clarifies that this is referring to the Dharma body
of the Buddha: “May all beings be enabled to forever abandon the
defilements and gain the pure ground of the Buddha and the inde­
pendent and unimpeded Dharma body of the Tathāgata.” (令一切眾
生永離垢染，得佛淨地如來法身自在無礙。 / T09n0278_p0514b29)
389. I feel obligated as a matter of principle to choose the more straightfor­
ward of interpretations of this line which is very clearly supported
by the BB translation’s: “May all beings be enabled to become pure
and marvelous fields of merit by which everyone is able to produce
measureless karmic rewards [through giving to them].” (令一切眾生。
作淨妙福田。悉能出生果報無量。 / T09n0278_p0514c23)
That said, the ambiguity of phrasing in the SA translation allows
this line to be interpreted in the opposite way. For instance, HH says:
“The bodhisattva also wishes to enable beings to become the world’s
foremost among those who delight in goodness and like to give.

866

The Flower Adornment Sutra
Because they always practice giving, they are therefore able to acquire
the karmic result of measureless and boundless merit.” (菩薩又願令眾
生成為世間第一的樂善好布施者，因常行布施，所以能獲得無量無邊的福
報。 / HYQS)
390. Although this could just as easily be translated as “a source of many
kinds of happiness” (眾樂具), I follow HH in his HYQS where he inter­
prets it as referring to a musical instrument. The BB translation has no
text corresponding to either interpretation.
391. It seems that the implication here is that his existence among humans
is not precipitated by his karmic causes and conditions so much as it is
as a choice made to teach others. HH seems to corroborate this when
he comments: “Although his body dwells together with others in the
human world—but, as for his mind, it is the same as if ‘it was not born
in this place.’” (身雖與眾生同住在人世間，但他的心等於「非此處生」。 /
HYQS)
392. “Personality view” (身見 / satkāya-dṛṣṭi) refers to the view of a truly
existent person in association with the five aggregates.
393. Venerable Victorious Ones (尊勝 / vijayin) is another title of the bud­
dhas.
394. I emend here the reading of the Taisho text to correct an obvious
graphic-similarity scribal error (correcting 如, “like” to 知, “know”),
this in accordance with the dictates of common sense and the support­
ive testimony of variant readings in four of the alternative editions as
well as in BB, HH, and QL.
395. HH interprets “the mind that possesses the nature of the various jew­
els” (具種種寶性心) as referring to jewels such as the “Three Jewels” of
the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.
396. HH explains these “difficult rebirth circumstances” as referring to the
eight difficulties.
397. This may be a reference to the first of the four means of attraction (四攝
法).
398. HH associates these “same-substance roots of goodness” (同體善根)
with the “same-substance great compassion” (同體大悲) with which
one sees others as like oneself and thus does not distinguish between
oneself and others.
399. HH indicates that “in all their faculties” (所有諸根) here refers to the six
sense faculties of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
400. HH indicates that “steadfastness,” literally “solidity” (堅固), is referring
here to steadfastness in faith.

Endnotes
867
401. I accord with QL’s analytic division of the following otherwise slightly
ambiguous text into nine results or “fruits” of perfecting this seventh
dedication, per the following ninefold list. (L130n1557_063202)
402. HH points out that, “As for possessing all the bodies, those are just
the Dharma body, the reward body, the response bodies, and the
transformation bodies.” (具足一切的身，就是法身、報身、應身、化身. /
HYQS)
403. “The Most Honored of All Bipeds” (兩足尊) is an honorific epithet
referring to the Buddha’s supremacy among all humans and devas.
This also refers to the Buddha’s twofold repletion in merit and wis­
dom.
404. “The Honored One among the Great Āryas” (大聖尊) is another hon­
orific epithet for the Buddha, probably originally from the Sanskrit
maharṣi.
405. “Tamer of Men to Be Tamed” (調御士) – This is another honorific title
for the Buddha for which the Sanskrit is puruṣa-damya-sārathi.
406. “Right and fixed position” or “the position of being fixed in what
is right” = samyaktva niyāma or samyaktva niyata = irreversibility in
one’s chosen vehicle, where, per Conze’s MDPPL one is “destined
for salvation” or has attained “certainty to have got safely out of this
world.”
407. In interpreting this otherwise nearly inscrutably vague clause as “…,
for there is only one [vehicle]. There are not two,” I follow HH who
says, “This is just to say that there is only one vehicle and there are
no ‘two vehicles.’” (也就是唯有一乘，沒有二乘。 / HYQS)
408. This is a reference to the five hindrances (nīvaraṇa) and ten manifest
afflictions (lit. “entanglements” = paryavasthāna).
409. “Tamer of Men” (調御人) is a reference to one of the ten titles of the
Buddha (調御丈夫 / puruṣa-damya-sārathi) which, per Conze’s MDPPL,
is “Tamer of Men to Be Tamed.”
410. This line (令於實法正思惟) could just as easily be translated as: “…
they enable them to rightly contemplate the dharma of reality.”
411. Beginning here and extending until the very end of this ninth of the
ten kinds of dedication (twenty pages later in the English text and four
pages later in the Chinese text [at 169b07]), there are more than sixty
of these often very long and multi-layered ways in which the bod­
hisattva “uses the mind of the unattached and unbound liberation”
(以無著無縛解脫心) in dedicating his roots of goodness to the perfec­
tion of various aspects of the conduct and vows of Samantabhadra.
412. I add “[He dedicates all his roots of goodness]” in brackets before
most all of the ensuing sixty-plus instances in which the text says:

868

The Flower Adornment Sutra
“to using the mind of the unattached and unbound liberation,” doing
so because the reader would surely otherwise lose track of its implic­
itly intended inclusion more than sixty times across the course of this
dedication’s very complex and multilayered list which goes on for the
next twenty English pages.
413. As for what I translate here as “vast-[minded] beings” (廣大眾生), I
base the translation on the explanation provided by QL: “As for ‘vast-
[minded] beings,’ this refers to those equipped with the great resolve”
(廣大眾生者具大心故。 / L130n1557_p0662b01). Without this bracketed
modification, one would read “vast beings” and instead envision
beings with vast bodies.
414. For what one could otherwise translate as referring to “perceptions
of worlds” (世想), I accord with HH who interprets this as referring
to perceptions of “previous lives, subsequent lives, etc.” (前世後世等 /
HYQS).
415. For what one could otherwise translate as referring to “perceptions of
understanding” (解想), I accord here with HH who interprets this as
referring to perceptions of “liberations” (解脫).
416. The SA text finishes this fifty-second list section with: “… and as his
mind becomes skillfully established.” It does so without specify­
ing precisely what is meant by this. HH suggests that this implicitly
means “and as his mind becomes skillfully established in the sphere
of these extreme subtleties (listed above)” (其心善於安住甚微細的境
界。/ HYQS). The BB translation instead specifies: “and becomes skill­
fully established in the mind of wisdom.” (善安住智慧心。 / T09n0278_
p0530b26–27).
417. When initially listed at the very beginning of this chapter, this tenth
dedication, “the dedication that is as measureless as the Dharma realm”
is instead referred to as “the dedication that penetrates the measure­
lessness of the Dharma realm” (入法界無量迴向, T10n0279_p0124c07).
418. There may have originally been the usually expected tenfold list of
dedications in this edition. I mention this because the BB edition does
indeed have ten of them, all of which are consistent with this SA list,
with the exception of its sixth one (not found at this place in the SA
translation) that reads: “wishing to acquire countless kinds of deep
and marvelous eloquence commensurate with the Dharma realm” (得
法界等無量深妙辯 / T09.278.535c26).
419. What I translate here as “names, phrases, or syllables” (名句文身 / nāma-
pada-vyañjana-kāya) are standard abhidharma terms for elements of
language.
420. Based on QL’s statement that, “As for ‘unification,’ aside from the bliss
of nirvāṇa, everything involves unification” (求和合者除涅槃樂皆有合

Endnotes
869
故), we can infer that “bliss of unification” here refers to all bliss in
the realm of conditioned existence where all pleasures in one way or
another involve unification of sense faculties (eye, ear, nose, tongue,
body, or mind) with their corresponding sense objects, including
objects of mind and the sense objects of the mind faculty, this in con­
trast to the bliss of nirvāṇa which can be said to result not from “uni­
fication” so much as from “disunion” or “disjunction.” (L130n1557_
p0701b10)
421. As an example of a dedication that damages roots of goodness, QL
says, “[A dedication in which] one vows to become a king of māras
is a dedication that damages goodness.” (願為魔王即壞善迴向 /
L130n1557_p0701b10)
422. HH identifies “twofold attachment” here as the attachment to self
and the attachment to dharmas.
423. I translate as “whirlpools” the otherwise ambiguous xuan (旋)
character based on the BB translation’s very specific xuanliu (旋流 /
T09n0278_p0537c16.
424. HH interprets this “substantial identity to oneself” phrase (同體) as
referencing the mind possessed of “the great compassion that sees
beings as substantially the same as oneself” (同體大悲).
425. QL points out that, in these twenty-nine dedications, one should
understand “to abide” (住) as meaning “to penetrate” (住即入義) in
what I believe to be the sense of “reaching a penetrating understand­
ing.” QL also points out that “Dharma realm” (法界) in these twenty-
nine dedications is specifically referring to what in the Huayan
hermeneutic system is called “the Dharma realm of the unimpeded
relationship between the noumenal and the phenomenal” (二十九句
皆云法界皆理事無礙法界也 / L130n1557_p0720b11.)
426. This is a play on words as “Samantabhadra,” the name of that great
bodhisattva-mahāsattva,” means “universally worthy.”
427. Again, this is the same play on words, for Samantabhadra
Bodhisattva’s name, “Samantabhadra,” means “universally worthy.”

870 
The Flower Adornment Sutra