Platform Sutra of the Dharma Treasure
of the Great Master, the Sixth Patriarch
Compiled by Bhikṣu Zongbao, successor to the patriarch
and abbot of Baoen Guangxiao Chansi (“Retribution of
Grace and Refulgence of Filiality Meditation Monastery”),
[where occurred the incident involving] the wind and the banner
Number One: Account of Origins
When the Great Master arrived at Baolin[si] (“Treasure Grove Monastery”),
Prefect Wei (whose given name was Qu) and his official staff entered the
monastery and invited the master to come to the lecture hall at Dafansi (“Great
Purity Monastery”) within the city, where he could tell his story and preach
the Dharma for those assembled. After the master took his seat, the prefect
and official staff, more than thirty in number, the Confucian scholars, more
than thirty in number, and the monks, nuns, and laypeople, more than a thou-
sand in number, simultaneously did obeisance34 to him and beseeched him
to relate the essentials of the Dharma.
The Great Master told the assembly, “Good friends,35 bodhi is funda-
mentally pure in its self-nature. You must simply use this mind [that you
already have], and you will achieve buddhahood directly and completely.
Good friends, listen well! This is the story of how I36 practiced and attained
the Dharma.
“My father was a native of Fanyang (Zhuo Xian, Hebei), but he was
banished to Lingnan and became a commoner in Xinzhou (Xinxing Xian,
Guangdong). I have been unfortunate: my father died early, and my aged
mother and I, her only child, moved here to Nanhai.37 Miserably poor, I sold
firewood in the marketplace.
“At one time, a customer bought some firewood and had me deliver it
to his shop, where he took it and paid me. On my way out of the gate I saw
someone38 reciting a sutra, and as soon as I heard the words of the sutra my
mind opened forth in enlightenment. I then asked the person what sutra he
was reciting, and he said, ‘The Diamond Sutra.’ I also asked, ‘Where did
17
348a

The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
you get this sutra?’ He said, ‘I have come from Dongchansi (“Eastern Med-
itation Monastery”) in Huangmei Xian in Qizhou (Qizhun, Hubei). The Fifth
Patriarch, Great Master Hongren, resides at and is in charge of instruction
at that monastery. He has over a thousand followers. I went there, did obei-
sance to him, and received this sutra there. Great Master [Hongren] always
exhorts both monks and laymen to simply maintain the Diamond Sutra, so
that one can see the [self]-nature39 by oneself and achieve buddhahood directly
and completely.’
“My hearing this was through a karmic connection from the past. Some-
one then gave me ten liang of silver to pay for my aged mother’s food and
clothing and told me to go to Huangmei to do obeisance to the Fifth Patri-
arch. I then left my mother for the last time and departed. In less than thirty-
odd days I arrived at Huangmei, where I did obeisance to the Fifth Patriarch.
“The patriarch asked me, ‘Where are you from, and what is it you seek?’
I replied, ‘Your disciple is a commoner from Xinzhou in Lingnan, and I have
come this far to pay reverence to you. I wish only to achieve buddhahood
and do not seek anything else.’ The patriarch said, ‘If you’re from Lingnan,
then you must be a hunter.40 How could you ever achieve buddhahood?’ I
said, ‘Although people may be from north or south, there is fundamentally
no north and south in the buddha-nature. Although this hunter’s body is dif-
ferent from Your Reverence’s, how can there be any difference in the buddha -
natures [within]?’
“The Fifth Patriarch wanted to speak further with me but, seeing that
his followers were gathered all around, he told me to go with them to work.
I said, ‘If I might address Your Reverence, your disciple constantly gener-
ates wisdom in my own mind. To not transcend the self-natures41 is equiva-
lent to the field of blessings. I wonder what work Your Reverence would
have me do?’ The patriarch said, ‘Some Glao barbarian!42 You’re very sharp!
Don’t say anything else! Go to the work shed.’43 I then retired to a chapel in
the rear [of the monastery].
“A practitioner had me break up kindling and tread the hulling pestle.44
After more than eight months of this, the patriarch came unexpectedly one
day to see me. He said, ‘I thought your views might have been of use, but I
was afraid there were evil people who might have harmed you. That was why
I haven’t spoken to you. Do you understand this?’ I replied, ‘I understood
18

Number One: Account of Origins
your intentions. I have not dared go by the main hall,45 so as to not remind
people.’46
“One day the patriarch called all of his followers together [and addressed
them, saying], ‘I preach to you that life and death is the great concern for
people of this world. But you spend all your time seeking only the fields of
blessings, rather than seeking to escape the ocean of suffering of birth and
death! If you are deluded as to the self-natures, how can you be saved by
blessings? You should each go reflect upon your own wisdom. Taking the
essence of prajñā within your own fundamental minds, you should each
compose a verse and come show it to me. If you are enlightened to the great
meaning, I will transmit the robe and Dharma to you and make you the patri-
arch of the sixth generation.
“‘Go quickly—this is an emergency, and you must not delay! Thinking
is of no use—he who is to see the [self]-nature will see it immediately upon
hearing these words! If there is such a one here, he will see it even if encamped
on top of a circle of knives!’47 (This is a metaphor for one of excellent abil-
ities.)
“The assembly [of followers] received these instructions and retired, say-
ing to each other, ‘We followers do not have to purify our minds and work to
compose verses. What advantage would there be in showing anything to His
Reverence [Hongren]?48 Elder Shenxiu is now our instructor, and he will cer-
tainly attain [the rank of sixth patriarch]. If ones such as us tried to compose
verses, we would only be wasting our energies.’ The others heard these words,
and all of them gave up [working on the problem]. They all said, ‘Afterward,
we will rely on Master Shenxiu. Why trouble to compose verses?’
“Shenxiu thought, ‘They are not going to submit verses, thinking that I
am their instructor. I must compose a verse and submit it to His Reverence.
If I do not submit a verse, how will His Reverence know the profundity of
understanding within my mind? If I submit a verse with the intention of seek-
ing the Dharma, it would be good. But if I am seeking to become patriarch,
it would be bad. How would that be any different from one with an ordinary
mind usurping the sagely status? But if I don’t submit a verse, I’ll never
attain the Dharma. What a problem! What a problem!’
“There was a hallway three bays in length in front of the Fifth Patri-
arch’s hall, where Auxiliary Lu Zhen49 was to be asked to paint episodes50
19
348b

348c
20
from the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra and a diagram of the Fifth Patriarch’s lineage, [all
for] wider dissemination and offerings.51 When Shenxiu had finished making
up his verse, he tried several times to go to the front of the hall [to offer his
verse in person]. But his mind was in a daze and his body covered with sweat,
and he was unable to submit [his verse]. Over the space of four days he tried
thirteen times to submit his verse but couldn’t. He thought, ‘It would be bet-
ter to write it in the hallway. After His Reverence sees it, if he says it is good,
I will come forward and bow to him, saying that it was mine. If he says it is
unacceptable, I will have wasted several years at this monastery. I will have
received the obeisance of others, but what Way52 will I have cultivated?’
“On that night, in the third watch (about 1:00 A.M.) so that no one else
knew, [Shenxiu] took a lamp and wrote his verse on the wall of the south cor-
ridor, submitting [to the patriarch] the viewpoint of his mind. The verse read:
The body is the bodhi tree;
The mind is like a bright mirror’s stand.
Be always diligent in rubbing it—
Do not let it attract any dust.
“After Shenxiu finished writing his verse, he returned to his room, with-
out anyone knowing. Shenxiu thought, ‘Tomorrow, if the Fifth Patriarch sees
my verse and is pleased, it will mean I have a karmic connection with the
Dharma. If he says it’s unacceptable, it will mean I am deluded by the lay-
ered barriers of past karma and am not fit to attain the Dharma. The sagely
intention is difficult to fathom!’ He remained in his room, thinking, but unable
to rest either sitting or lying down.
“When it came to be the fifth watch (about 5:00 A.M.), the patriarch
knew that Shenxiu had not been able to enter the gate and had been unable
to see the self-nature. When morning came, Hongren called Auxiliary Lu to
come paint the lineage and episodes on the wall of the south corridor. Unex-
pectedly seeing the verse, he announced, ‘There is no need for you to paint
anything. I am sorry we have troubled you to come so far. The [Diamond]
Sutra says, “All that which has characteristics is false.” We should just leave
this verse here for people to recite. By cultivating in reliance upon this verse,
they will avoid falling into the unfortunate modes of existence. To cultivate
according to this verse will be greatly beneficial!’
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

21
“[Hongren then] commanded his followers to burn incense and do obei-
sance [to the verse, saying], ‘All who recite this verse will be able to see the
nature.’ The followers recited it, all of them sighing at how excellent it was.
“But in the third watch [that night] the patriarch called Shenxiu into the
hall and asked him, ‘Is the verse yours?’ Shenxiu said, ‘Yes, it is mine, but
I am unable to seek the status of patriarch. I seek Your Reverence’s com-
passion. Do I have some small wisdom or not?’
“Hongren said, ‘When you composed this verse you had not seen the
fundamental nature. You have come only as far as outside the gate; you have
not yet come inside. With understanding such as this you will not be able to
attain the unsurpassable bodhi. The unsurpassable bodhi is to be able, at these
very words, to recognize your own fundamental mind and to see that your
own fundamental nature is neither born nor extinguished. It is to see this nat-
urally in every moment of thought and at all times: the myriad dharmas are
without obstruction; the one is true and all are true.53 The myriad realms are
naturally thuslike, and the thuslike mind is the true. If what you see is like
this, then it is the self-nature of the unsurpassable bodhisattva.
“‘Go now, and meditate upon this for a day or two. Compose another
verse and bring it to me. I will see from your verse whether you have been
able to enter the gate and whether I should transmit to you the robe and
Dharma.’ Shenxiu bowed and went out. But even after several days he was
unable to create another verse. His mind was in a daze and his spirit was dis-
turbed, as if he were in a dream, and he could take no pleasure in either walk-
ing or sitting.”
[Huineng continued,] “After a couple of days an acolyte passed by the
hulling room reciting the verse. Upon hearing it, I immediately knew that
[the author of] the verse had not seen the fundamental nature. Although I
had never received any instruction, I had already recognized the great inten-
tion [of the sages], so I asked the acolyte, ‘What verse is it you’re reciting?’
The acolyte said, ‘What a [disgusting] hunter you are! Don’t you know that
Great Master [Hongren] has said that life and death is the great concern for
people of this world, and, wanting to transmit the robe and bowl, he com-
manded his followers to compose verses and show them to him? If there
were one who was enlightened to the great intention, he would transmit the
robe and Dharma and make that one the sixth patriarch. Elder Shenxiu wrote
Number One: Account of Origins

349a
22
a formless verse on the wall of the south corridor. Great Master [Hongren]
has commanded us all to recite it, [saying that] if we cultivate on the basis
of this verse, we will avoid falling into the unfortunate modes of existence,
that it will be very beneficial to cultivate on the basis of this verse!’
“I said, (One text has “I also want to recite this, in order to make cer-
tain my conditions for rebirth.”) ‘Holy One, I have been treading the pestle
here for more than eight months, and I’ve never even gone past the front of
the hall. I would like you to take me to this verse so that I might do obei-
sance to it.’ The acolyte took me to the verse so that I could do obeisance to
it. I said, ‘I am unable to read. Holy One, would you read it for me?’ At the
time Zhang Riyong, Administrative Aide54 of Jiangzhou, was there, and he
read [the verse] to me aloud.
“After hearing it I said, ‘I also have a verse, and would like the Admin-
istrative Aide to write it for me.’ The Administrative Aide said, ‘You’ve
composed a verse? How unusual!’ I said to the Administrative Aide, ‘If you
wish to study the unsurpassable bodhi, you should not make light of begin-
ners. The lowest of the low may have the most supreme wisdom, and the
highest of the high may be without [spiritual] intention or wisdom. To make
light of others is a transgression unlimited and infinite.’
“The Administrative Aide said, ‘Just recite your verse. I will write it for
you. If you attain the Dharma, you must save me first (i.e., before teaching
anyone else). Don’t forget what I say!’
“My verse went:
Bodhi is fundamentally without any tree;
The bright mirror is also not a stand.
Fundamentally there is not a single thing—
Where could any dust be attracted?
“After I finished this verse everyone around there became agitated and
couldn’t help sighing with amazement. They all said to each other, ‘How
strange! You just can’t go by looks alone! Why is it always that people like
that are living bodhisattvas!’55 Seeing that they were getting excited and wor-
ried that someone might harm me, the patriarch rubbed out the verse with
his sandal and said, ‘This [person] too has not seen the nature.’ Those pres-
ent accepted this.
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

23
“The next day, Hongren secretly came to the hulling room, where he
saw me with a rock on my back pounding rice and said, ‘He who seeks the
Way forgets his body on behalf of the Dharma. Is that how it is [with you]?’
He then asked, ‘Is the rice ripe yet?’ I replied, ‘The rice has been ripe for a
long time. It only lacks sifting [the hulls from the grain].’ The patriarch struck
his staff on the pestle three times and left. I understood what he meant—that
I should enter his room at the third drum (i.e., the third watch of the night,
about 1:00 A.M.).
“The patriarch kept his robe (kaṣāya) hidden and would not let anyone
see it. He preached the Diamond Sutra for me. When he reached the words
‘responding to the nonabiding, yet generating the mind’56 I experienced a
great enlightenment, [realizing that] all the myriad dharmas do not transcend
their self-natures. I thereupon informed the patriarch of this, saying, ‘No
matter when, the self-natures are fundamentally and naturally pure. No mat-
ter when, the self-natures are fundamentally neither generated nor extin-
guished. No matter when, the self-natures are fundamentally and naturally
sufficient unto themselves. No matter when, the self-natures are fundamen-
tally without movement. No matter when, the self-natures are able to gen-
erate the myriad dharmas.’
“Knowing that I had been enlightened to the fundamental nature, the
patriarch said to me, ‘If one does not recognize the fundamental mind, study-
ing the Dharma is of no benefit. If one recognizes one’s own fundamental
mind, one sees one’s own fundamental nature. This is to be called a great
man, a teacher of humans and gods, a buddha.’
“At the third watch of the night I received the Dharma. No one knew of
this. He then transmitted the sudden teaching and the robe and bowl, say-
ing, ‘You have become the patriarch of the sixth generation. You should
maintain your own mindfulness well,57 and you should save sentient beings
extensively. Do not allow the dissemination [of the Dharma] to be cut off in
the future. Listen to my verse:
Sentient beings cast their seeds;
Because of the earth the fruits are born.
Insentient objects have no seeds,
No natures, and no birth.
Number One: Account of Origins

349b
24
“The patriarch went on, ‘When Great Master [Bodhi]dharma came to
this land long ago, people did not yet come to rely upon him. Therefore he
transmitted this robe as the embodiment of reliance [upon him]. It has been
handed down for generation after generation. The Dharma, moreover, is the
transmission of the mind with the mind. [The mind] must always enlighten
itself, emancipate itself. From ancient times, the buddhas have only trans-
mitted the fundamental essence; the masters have secretly handed on the
fundamental mind.
“‘The robe [however] has become the focus of conflict, and beginning
with you it should not be transmitted. If you transmit this robe, your life
expectancy will be like a hanging thread. You should go quickly! I fear peo-
ple will harm you!’ I addressed him, ‘Where should I go?’ The patriarch
said, ‘When you encounter destruction (huai), you should stop. When you
come upon a group (hui), you should secret yourself.’
“In the third watch I took the robe and bowl and said, ‘I am from south
China and do not know the mountainous roads around here. How do I get to
the mouth of the [Yangzi] River?’ The Fifth Patriarch said, ‘Do not be dis-
heartened, I will see you off.’ The patriarch accompanied me as far as Jiu-
jiang station, where he had us get on a boat. The Fifth Patriarch took the oar
and rowed [the boat] himself. I said, ‘Your Reverence, please sit. Your dis-
ciple should row!’ Hongren said, ‘I should take you over [to the other shore].’
I said, ‘When one is deluded, one thinks teachers take [sentient beings over
to the other shore], but when one is enlightened, one realizes one crosses
over by oneself. Although “cross over” is only a single term, its uses are var-
ied. Since I was born in a border region, my pronunciation is not correct. I
have received transmission of the Dharma from you, Master, and I have now
become enlightened. Can it be anything other than that the self-natures have
crossed themselves over?’
“The patriarch said, ‘So it is, so it is. In the future, Buddhism will flour-
ish greatly because of you. Three years after you go, I will depart this world.
You should go now. Make an effort to go south, and don’t be in a hurry to
preach [the Dharma]. It is difficult to propagate Buddhism!’
“After I left the patriarch, I started out walking toward the south. In the
second month [of traveling] I reached the Dayu Mountains.58 (Hongren
returned [to the monastery] and for several days did not go into the hall.
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

349c
25
The assembly [of followers] was in doubt about this and proceeded to him
to ask, “Is Your Reverence ill or discomforted in some small way?” He said,
“I am not ill. The robe and Dharma are in the south.” They asked, “To whom
have you transmitted them?” He said, “One who is able has received them.”
Thus did the assembly learn of it.)
“Coming after me were several hundred people, who wanted to take
away the robe and bowl. One monk, of the lay surname Chen and named
Huiming, had previously been a general of the fourth rank. He was coarse
and excitable by nature, and he really wanted to find me. He reached me
before the rest of the group chasing me. I threw the robe and bowl down on
a rock and said, ‘This robe emblematizes reliance [upon the patriarchs]. How
can you struggle for it?’ I hid in the underbrush, and Huiming tried to lift it
without success. Then he called to me, saying, ‘O practitioner, O practitioner!
I have come for the Dharma, not for the robe.’ I then came out and sat on
the rock.
“Huiming bowed to me and said, ‘I wish that you would preach the
Dharma for me.’ I said, ‘You say you’ve come for the Dharma. [If so], you
must eliminate the various conditions and not generate a single thought. [If
you do], I will preach the Dharma for you.’ Huiming was quiet for a time. I
said, ‘Do not think of good, and do not think of evil. At just such a time,
what is Elder Huiming’s original face?’ At these words, Huiming [experi-
enced] a great enlightenment. He then questioned me again, saying, ‘Other
than the secret words and secret intention [you expressed] just now, is there
any other secret intention?’ I said, ‘What I have preached to you is not secret.
If you counter-illuminate [your own original face you will realize that] the
secret was on your side.’
“Huiming said, ‘Although I was at [Hongren’s monastery in] Huangmei,
I actually never thought about my own [original] face. To receive your instruc-
tions now is like a man who drinks water knowing [immediately] whether it
is cold or warm. Now you are my teacher.’
“I said, ‘If this is the case, then we share the same teacher of Huangmei.
Well should you protect and maintain [the teaching]!’ Huiming asked further,
‘Where should I go now?’ I said, ‘When you encounter ampleness you should
stop, when you come upon munificence you should reside.’59 Hui ming bowed
and left. (Huiming returned to the foot of the mountain. He addressed the
Number One: Account of Origins

26
group that had come after me, saying “I just climbed this mountain of boul-
ders, and there was no trace of him. We should try searching by another
road.” The group of those chasing [Huineng] all did as he said. Huiming
later changed [his name] to Daoming, in order to avoid the first character
of his teacher’s name.)
“After this I went to Caoqi. There too I was beset by evil people search-
ing for me and so fled to Sihui [Xian],60 where I spent fifteen years in all
[living] with a group of hunters.61 During this time I preached the Dharma
to the hunters when the occasion arose. The hunters had always had me guard
their nets, but whenever I saw living animals in them I set them free. When-
ever it was mealtime, I put vegetables in the pot for boiling the meat. They
asked me about this sometimes, and I would answer, ‘These are just veg-
etables to go with the meat.’
“One day I realized that the time had come to disseminate the Dharma,
that I could not hide forever. Accordingly, I left [the mountains and] went
to Faxingsi (“Monastery of the Dharma-nature”) in Guangzhou, where I
encountered Dharma Master Yinzong lecturing on the Nirvana Sutra.
“At that time the wind was blowing and the banner [announcing the lec-
ture] was moving. One monk said that the wind was moving, while another
monk said the banner was moving. They argued on and on, so I went for-
ward and said, ‘It is not the wind that is moving, and it is not the banner that
is moving. It is your minds that are moving.’ Everyone listening was amazed.
Yinzong had me brought up to the dais, where he examined me on the import
of what I had said. Hearing me say that the discrimination of the truth did
not depend on written words, Yinzong said, ‘You are certainly an extra -
ordinary person. Long ago I heard that the robe and bowl of Huangmei had
come south—might you be the one [who received them]?’ I said, ‘In all mod-
esty, [I am].’
“At this Yinzong bowed to me and asked me to bring forth the robe and
bowl to show to the assembly. He questioned me further, saying ‘What instruc-
tions did you receive at Huangmei?’ I said, ‘I received no instructions. [Hon-
gren and I] only discussed seeing the nature, we did not discuss samādhi and
emancipation.’ Yinzong said, ‘Why did you not discuss samādhi and eman-
cipation?’ I said, ‘Because the dualistic dharmas are not Buddhism. Buddhism
consists of nondualistic dharmas.’
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

350a
27
“Yinzong also asked, ‘How is it that Buddhism consists of nondualistic
dharmas?’ I said, ‘You lecture on the Nirvana Sutra’s elucidation of the buddha -
nature, which is a nondualistic dharma of Buddhism. Just as when Bodhisattva
King of Lofty Virtue asked the Buddha, ‘Do those who break the four major
prohibitions and commit the five perverse transgressions, as well as the icchan -
tikas, eradicate their good roots and buddha-natures?’ The Buddha said, ‘There
are two types of good roots. One is permanent and the other is impermanent.
The buddha-nature is not permanent and not impermanent.’ Therefore, not to
eradicate is said to be nondual. One type [of roots] is said to be the good, and
the other is the nongood. The buddha-nature is not the good and not the non-
good. This is called nondual. The skandhas and sensory realms are seen as
two by ordinary people, but the wise comprehend their natures to be nondual.
The nondual nature is none other than the buddha-nature.
“When Yinzong heard this explanation, he joyfully held his palms
together and said, ‘My lecturing on the sutra was like a [worthless piece of]
roof tile or rock, while your explanation is like gold.’ At this, he adminis-
tered the tonsure for me and asked to serve me as his teacher.
“Thus did I, under the bodhi tree, reveal the East Mountain teaching. After
receiving the Dharma at East Mountain, I experienced all kinds of suffering,
and my life expectancy was like a dangling thread. Today I have been able to
join this assembly of the prefect, government staff members, monks, nuns, and
laypeople—could it but be the karmic result of successive eons? Also, that
you have been able to hear the sudden teaching just given and have gained the
cause for attaining the Dharma can only be because in past lives you cultivated
good roots identical to those of the buddhas. The teaching is that which has
been transmitted by the former sages; it is not something known to myself
[alone]. I wish you would all listen to this teaching of the former sages: you
should all purify your minds, and after hearing it you should all eradicate your
doubts. You are no different from the former generations of sages.”
The entire assembly, after hearing this Dharma, joyfully did obeisance
and dispersed.
Number Two: Prajñā
The next day Prefect Wei asked [Huineng] to benefit [sentient beings by lec-
turing on the Dharma]. The master ascended the [lecture] seat and informed
Number Two: Prajñā

28
the assembly, “You should all purify your minds and concentrate on the Great
Perfection of Wisdom (mahāprajñāpāramitā).”
[Huineng] continued, “Good friends, bodhi is the wisdom of prajñā.
People of this world possess it fundamentally and naturally. It is only because
your minds are deluded that you are unable to become enlightened your-
selves. You must rely on a great spiritual compatriot to show you how to see
the nature. Youmust realize that there is fundamentally no distinction between
the buddha natures of the foolish and the wise—it is only because of delu-
sion and enlightenment that [you think they are] different and that there are
foolish and wise.
“I will now explain the teaching of the Great Perfection of Wisdom for
you, so that you will all attain wisdom. Listen well and attentively, and I will
explain this for you!
“Good friends, people of this world always recite prajñā with their
mouths, but they don’t recognize the prajñā of the self-natures. This is like
talking about eating, which doesn’t satisfy one’s hunger. If you just talk about
emptiness with your mouths, you won’t be able to see the nature for a myr-
iad eons. Ultimately, this is of no benefit at all.
“Good friends, ‘mahāprajñāpāramitā’ is a Sanskrit word; here we say
‘great wisdom going to the other shore.’ This must be practiced in the mind,
not recited by the mouth. To recite it orally without practicing it in the mind
is [as unreal] as a phantasm or hallucination, [and as evanescent] as dew or
lightning. To recite it orally and practice it mentally is for mind and mouth
to correspond. The fundamental nature is buddha. There is no other buddha
apart from this nature.
“What is ‘mahā’? Mahā means ‘great.’ The ratiocination of the mind is
vast, like space, which is boundless. [Space] is also without square and round,
large and small. It is also neither blue, yellow, red, nor white. It is also with-
out above and below, long and short. It is also without anger and without joy,
without affirmation and without negation, without good and without evil, with-
out beginning and end. The fields of the Buddha are all identical to space. The
wondrous natures of people of this world are empty, without a single dharma
that can be perceived. The emptiness of the self-natures is also like this.62
“Good friends, don’t listen to me explain emptiness and then become
attached to emptiness. The most important thing is not to become attached
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

350b
29
to emptiness. If you empty your minds and sit in quietude, this is to become
attached to the emptiness of blankness.
“Good friends, the space of this world embraces within itself the myr-
iad things and [all] the images of form. The sun, moon, and stars; and the
mountains, rivers, and earth; the springs and streams that enrich the plants
and forests; bad people and good people, bad dharmas and good dharmas;
the heavens and hells; all the great oceans and the mountains, including
Sumeru: all of these exist within space. The emptiness of the natures of the
people of this world is also like this. Good friends, that the self-natures can
embody the myriad dharmas is ‘great.’ The myriad dharmas are within peo-
ple’s natures. If one perceives the goodness and badness of people without
ever grasping or rejecting [their goodness and badness], one will not become
tainted or attached. For the mind to be like space is called ‘great.’ Therefore,
it is said [to be] ‘mahā.’
“Good friends, the deluded speak with their mouths, but the wise prac-
tice with their minds. Furthermore, there are deluded people who empty their
minds and sit in quietude without thinking of anything whatsoever, claim-
ing that this is great. You can’t even speak to these people, because of their
false views!
“Good friends, the ratiocination of the mind is vast and great, permeat-
ing the dharmadhātu (i.e., the cosmos). Functioning, it comprehensively and
distinctly responds [to things]. Functioning, it knows everything.63 Every-
thing is the one [mind], the one [mind] is everything.64 [With mind and dhar-
mas] going and coming of themselves, the essence of the mind is without
stagnation. This is ‘prajñā.’
“Good friends, all prajñā wisdom is generated from the self-natures. It
does not enter us from outside. To not err in its functioning is called the spon-
taneous functioning of the true nature.When the one [mind] is true, all [things]
are true.65 When your minds are considering the great affair, you will not
practice the small path. Do not be always speaking of emptiness with your
mouth without cultivating the practice in your minds! That would be like an
ordinary person claiming to be a king! You will never attain anything [this
way. Such persons] are not my disciples.
“Good friends, what is prajñā? In Chinese, it is called wisdom. To always
practice wisdom in all places, at all times, and in all moments of thought,
Number Two: Prajñā

350c
30
without stupidity—this is the practice of prajñā. A single moment’s stupid-
ity and prajñā is eradicated, a single moment’s wisdom and prajñā is gen-
erated. The people of this world are stupid and deluded and do not see prajñā.
They speak of prajñā in their mouths but are always stupid in their minds.
They always say to themselves, ‘I am cultivating prajñā.’ In every moment
of thought they speak of emptiness, without recognizing true emptiness.
Prajñā is without shape or characteristics, it is the mind of wisdom. To have
such an understanding is called the wisdom of prajñā.
“What is ‘pāramitā’? This is an Indian word; in Chinese it is ‘arriving
at the other shore.’ If one understands the meaning [of Buddhism,] one tran-
scends samsara; if one is attached to one’s sensory realms, samsara is acti-
vated,66 just as waves [arise on] water. This is called the ‘other shore,’ there-
fore it is said to be ‘pāramitā.’
“Good friends, the deluded person recites with his mouth, and he does
so with falsity and error. To practice in every moment of thought is called
the true nature. To be enlightened to this Dharma is the Dharma of prajñā,
to cultivate this practice is the practice of prajñā. To not cultivate this is to
be an ordinary [unenlightened] person. To cultivate this in a single moment
of thought is to be equivalent to the Buddha in one’s own body.
“Good friends, ordinary people are buddhas, and the afflictions are bodhi.
With a preceding moment of deluded thought, one was an ordinary person,
but with a succeeding moment of enlightened thought, one is a buddha. To
be attached to one’s sensory realms in a preceding moment of thought is afflic-
tion, but to transcend the realms in a succeeding moment of thought is bodhi.
“Good friends, ‘mahāprajñāpāramitā’ is the most honored, the supreme,
the primary. It is without abiding [in the present], without going [into the
past], and without coming [from the future]. It is from this that all the buddhas
of the three periods of time emerge. One should use this great wisdom to
destroy the enervating defilements of the afflictions of the five skandhas.67
Those who cultivate in this fashion will definitely accomplish the enlight-
enment of buddhahood, transforming the three poisons into morality, med-
itation, and wisdom.
“Good friends, in this teaching of ours68 eighty-four thousand wisdoms
are generated from the one prajñā. Why? Because the people of this world
have eighty-four thousand enervating defilements. If they were without these
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

31
enervating defilements, wisdom would always be manifest and they would not
depart from the self-natures. To be enlightened to this Dharma is to be without
thought. To be without recollection, without attachment, to not activate the false
and deceptive—this is to allow one’s self[-suchness]-nature to function. To use
wisdom to contemplate all the dharmas without grasping or rejecting is to see
the nature and accomplish the enlightenment of buddhahood.
“Good friends, if you wish to enter into the profound dharmadhātu and
the samādhi of prajñā, you must cultivate the practice of prajñā and recite the
Diamond Sutra. Thus will you attain seeing the nature. You should realize that
the merits of this sutra are immeasurable and unlimited. They are clearly praised
within the sutra; I cannot explain them fully here. This teaching is the Supreme
Vehicle: it is preached for those of great wisdom, it is preached for those of
superior capacities. Those of small capacities and small wisdom who hear it
will generate doubt. Why? It is likened to rain poured down by the great dragon
onto Jambudvīpa: it washes away all the cities, towns, and villages as if they
were floating plants. But rain falling on the ocean causes it neither to increase
nor to decrease. If a person of the Mahayana or a person of the Supreme Vehi-
cle hears this explanation of the Diamond Sutra, his mind will open forth in
enlightened understanding. Therefore, you should understand that your fun-
damental natures have in themselves the wisdom of prajñā. Allowing this wis-
dom to function of itself in constant contemplation, one therefore need not rely
on the written word. It is likened to rainwater, which does not derive from
heaven. Fundamentally, this [rainwater] is engendered by the dragon, and it
causes all living beings, all plants, all those sentient and insentient beings to
be enriched. But the hundred streams flow together into the ocean, where they
become one. The wisdom of prajñā, which is the fundamental nature of sen-
tient beings, is also like this.
“Good friends, those of small capacities who hear this sudden teaching
are like plants whose capacities are small. Beset by a great rain, they all col-
lapse and are unable to grow. People of small capacities are also like this.
They possess the wisdom of prajñā fundamentally, no differently from those
of great wisdom. So why do they hear the Dharma without being able to
become enlightened? Because of the profundity of their false views and lay-
ered afflictions! Just as if great clouds are blocking the sun, unless a wind
blows [them away], the light of the sun will not be visible.
Number Two: Prajñā

351a
32
“There is also no great and small in the wisdom of prajñā; it is only that
the delusion and enlightenment of the minds of all sentient beings differ. Those
with deluded minds appear to be cultivating and seeking buddhahood, but
they are unenlightened to their self-natures. Hence are they of small capaci-
ties. If one is to be enlightened to the sudden teaching, one cannot cultivate
externally (i.e., superficially): one should just constantly activate correct views
in one’s own mind, and the enervating defilements of the afflictions will be
rendered permanently unable to defile one. This is to see the nature.
“Good friends, one should not reside within or without, and one’s going
and coming should be autonomous. One who is able to eradicate the mind
of attachment will [attain] penetration unhindered. Those who are able to
cultivate this practice are fundamentally no different from [what is described
in] the Prajñā Sutra.
“Good friends, all the sutras and all their words, the two vehicles of great
and small, and the twelve divisions of the canon—all these were established
because of people, and could only have been established because of the wis-
dom nature. If there were no people in this world, all the myriad dharmas
would be fundamentally and naturally nonexistent. Therefore, you should real-
ize that the myriad dharmas were fundamentally generated because of peo-
ple. All the sutras and texts exist through being preached because of people.
“Because some people are stupid and some are wise, the stupid being the
small and the wise being the great, the stupid ask questions of the wise and the
wise preach the Dharma for the stupid. When a stupid person suddenly becomes
enlightened, his mind opening forth, he is no different from a wise person.
“Good friends, if one is unenlightened, then the buddhas are sentient
beings. When one is enlightened for [even] a single moment, then sentient
beings are buddhas. Therefore you should understand that the myriad dhar-
mas are all within your own minds. Why can’t you suddenly see the funda-
mental nature of suchness from within your own minds? The Sutra of the
Bodhisattva Precepts says, ‘I am fundamentally pure in self-nature.’ If you
recognize your own mind and see the nature, you will definitely accomplish
the enlightenment of buddhahood. The Vimalakīrti Sutra says, ‘He then un -
expectedly retrieved the fundamental mind.’
“Good friends, when I was with His Reverence Hongren, I became
enlightened as soon as I heard him speak. I suddenly saw the fundamental
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

351b
33
nature of suchness. Therefore, I am disseminating this teaching so that you
who study the Way69 may become suddenly enlightened and [achieve] bodhi.
You should each contemplate your minds and each see the fundamental
nature. If you do not become enlightened by yourself, then you must seek a
great spiritual compatriot, someone who understands the Dharma of the
Supreme Vehicle, to indicate directly the correct path for you. This spiritual
compatriot will have a great background and will, so to speak, lead you to
the attainment of seeing the nature. This is because the spiritual compatriot
is able to manifest the causes of all the good dharmas. All the buddhas of
the three periods of time and the twelve divisions of the canon are funda-
mentally and naturally immanent within the natures of people, but if you
cannot become enlightened yourself, you must seek a spiritual compatriot’s
instructions in order to see [the nature].
“If you can become enlightened yourself, don’t rely on external seeking—
don’t think I’m saying you can only attain emancipation through [the help of]
a spiritual compatriot other than yourself. This is not the case! Why? Within
your own minds there is a spiritual compatriot [who will help you] become
enlightened by yourself! If you activate the false and deluded, you will become
all mixed up with false thoughts. Although some external spiritual compatri-
ots may be teachers, they cannot save you. If you activate the correct and true
and contemplate with prajñā, in a single instant [all your] false thoughts will
be completely eradicated. If you recognize the self-nature, with a single [expe-
rience of] enlightenment you will attain the stage of buddhahood.
“Good friends, in wisdom’s contemplation both interior and exterior are
clearly penetrated, and one recognizes one’s own fundamental mind. If you
recognize your fundamental mind, this is the fundamental emancipation.
And if you attain emancipation, this is the samādhi of prajñā, this is non-
thought.
“What is nonthought? If in seeing all the dharmas, the mind is not defiled
or attached, this is nonthought. [The mind’s] functioning pervades all loca-
tions, yet it is not attached to all the locations. Just purify the fundamental
mind, causing the six consciousnesses to emerge from the six [sensory] gates,
[causing one to be] without defilement or heterogeneity within the six types
of sensory data (literally, the “six dusts”), autonomous in the coming and
going [of mental phenomena], one’s penetrating function without stagnation.
Number Two: Prajñā

34
This is the samādhi of prajñā, the autonomous emancipation. This is called
the practice of nonthought.
“If one does not think of the hundred things in order to cause thought
to be eradicated, this is bondage within the Dharma. This is called an extreme
view.
“Good friends, to be enlightened to the Dharma of nonthought is for the
myriad dharmas to be completely penetrated. To be enlightened to the Dharma
of nonthought is to see the realms of [all] the buddhas. To be enlightened to
the Dharma of nonthought is to arrive at the stage of buddhahood.
“Good friends, those who attain my Dharma in later generations will
see and practice according to this sudden teaching exactly as I have
explained.70 Because they will generate the vow [to attain buddhahood] and
maintain it just as if they are serving the Buddha, they will not regress dur-
ing their entire lives and will definitely enter the stage of sagehood. But they
must transmit that which has been silently transmitted from before, impart-
ing it without obscuring the true Dharma. If they do not see and practice as
I have explained, but [operate] within [the context of] another Dharma, the
transmission will not occur and they will do a disservice to (literally, “harm”)
their predecessors. Ultimately, this would be of no benefit [to sentient beings].
I fear that stupid people will not understand and will revile this teaching, for
which they will eradicate their seeds of buddhahood for a hundred eons and
a thousand lives!
“Good friends, I have a formless verse, which you should all listen to.
Whether you are a householder or one who has left home, you should simply
cultivate in reliance on this. To not cultivate [enlightenment] yourself, but merely
to memorize what I say, would be of no benefit at all. Listen to my verse:
The penetration of preaching and the penetration of mind
Are like the sun located in space.
I transmit only the Dharma of seeing the nature;
I have appeared in the world to destroy the false teachings.
There are no sudden and gradual in the Dharma,
It is delusion and enlightenment that are slow or fast.
It is only this teaching of seeing the nature
Which stupid people cannot comprehend.
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

351c
35
Although there are a myriad ways to explain it,
Those which are reasonable all revert to the one.
Within the dark house of the afflictions
There always lives the sun of wisdom.
The false comes, and the afflictions arrive [too].
The correct comes, and the afflictions are eliminated.
Allowing neither false nor correct to function,
In purity, one arrives at the remainderless [nirvana].
Bodhi fundamentally is the self-nature.
Activate the mind, and [all is] false.
Purify the mind within the false.
Just be correct in being without the three hindrances.
If people of this world cultivate the Way (i.e., enlightenment),
They will not be hindered by anything at all.
Always see one’s own errors, and
Be in accord with the Way.71
The categories of form have their own ways, and
They do not hinder or afflict each other.
If one seeks the way apart from the Way,
One will never see the Way.
If one passes one’s life in prevarication,72
One will ultimately only cause oneself grief.
If you want to see the true Way,
Practice the correct, and this is the Way.
If one’s eyes have no aspiration for the Way,
One will practice in obscurity and will not see the Way.
If one is a true cultivator of the Way,
One will not see the transgressions of the world.
If one sees the errors of others,
One’s own errors will rather be augmented.73
If one considers others to be in error and not oneself,
One’s errors will automatically embody a transgression.
Number Two: Prajñā

Simply eliminate any inclination to see errors and
Smash away the afflictions.
Repugnance and attraction have nothing to do with the mind.
Stretch out both legs and lie down.
If you want to teach others,
You must have expedient means yourself.
Do not make them destroy their doubts—
This is what allows the self-nature to become manifest.
Buddhism’s being in the world
Is not separate from the awareness of the world.
To seek bodhi apart from the world
Is like searching for the horn of a hare.
Correct seeing (or views) is called to escape the world,
False seeing is [to be in] the world.
When false and correct are completely destroyed,
The nature of bodhi is just so.
This verse is the sudden teaching.
It is also called the ship of the great Dharma.
In delusion one can listen to the sutras for eons, but
Enlightenment occurs in a moment.
The master spoke again, “Now at Dafan Monastery I have preached this
sudden teaching. I hope that all sentient beings throughout the dharmadhātu
will at these words see the nature and accomplish buddhahood.”
At that time everyone listening to the master’s preaching—Prefect Wei,
the government staff, and the ordained and lay followers—all experienced
enlightenment. Simultaneously they bowed and sighed, “How excellent!
Whenever has a buddha appeared in the world in Lingnan!”
Number Three: Questions
One day Prefect Wei held a large vegetarian feast on behalf of the master.
When the feast was over, the prefect invited the master to ascend the dais [to
give a sermon]. The government staff, scholars, and commoners respectfully
bowed once again and asked, “It was truly inconceivable (i.e., wonderful) for
36
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

352a
37
us to hear Your Reverence explain the Dharma, but now we have some slight
doubts. We wish that, in your great compassion, you would make a special
effort to explain these for us.” The master said, “If you have doubts, then
ask, and I will explain them for you.”
Lord Wei asked, “The doctrine Your Reverence has preached—it must
be that of Great Master Bodhidharma?” The master said, “So it is.” Wei
asked, “I have heard that when Bodhidharma first taught Emperor Wu of the
Liang, the emperor asked, ‘Throughout my entire life I have constructed
monasteries, had monks ordained, and held vegetarian feasts. What merit is
there in these?’ Bodhidharma said, ‘In fact, these are without merit.’” [Wei
said,] “Your disciple does not understand the principle of this, and I ask you
to explain it for me.”
The master said, “‘In fact, these are without merit’—do not doubt the
words of the former sage. Emperor Wu was heterodox in mind and did not
understand the correct Dharma. To build monasteries, have monks ordained,
and hold vegetarian feasts is to seek blessings, but one cannot convert bless-
ings into merit. Merit exists within the dharmakāya, not within the cultiva-
tion of blessings.”
The master also said, “Seeing the nature is ‘effort,’ and universal same-
ness is ‘virtue.’ To be without stagnation in successive moments of thought,
to always see the fundamental nature, [to possess] the wondrous function-
ing of the true and actual—this is called ‘merit.’ To be humble in the mind
within is ‘effort’; to practice ritual without is ‘virtue.’ For the self-nature to
establish the myriad dharmas is ‘effort’; for the mind-essence to transcend
thoughts is ‘virtue.’ To not transcend the self-natures is ‘effort’; for one’s
responsive functioning to be undefiled is ‘virtue.’ If you would seek merit
and the dharmakāya, just rely on this, and [you will create] true merit. Those
who cultivate merit must be without disparagement in their minds but always
practice respect for all. Those whose minds always disparage others will not
eradicate their own [false views of the] self and are themselves without
‘effort.’ [Those who consider the] self-natures to be empty and false are
themselves without ‘virtue.’ It is only because they consider themselves to
be great that they always disparage everyone else.
“Good friends, to be without any suspension of one’s continuous thoughts
[of inner humility, etc.] is ‘effort’; for the mind to practice universal directness
Number Three: Questions

38
is ‘virtue.’ To cultivate the nature oneself is ‘effort’; to cultivate the body
oneself is ‘virtue.’
“Good friends, merit must be seen within the self-natures, it cannot be
sought in donations and offerings. Therefore, blessings and merit are dif-
ferent. Emperor Wu did not understand the truth of this, it was not that our
patriarch [Bodhidharma] was wrong.”
Prefect [Wei] asked further, “Your disciple always sees monks and
laypeople [practicing] mindfulness of Buddha Amitābha and wishing for
rebirth in the Western [Paradise]. Please explain this, are they reborn there
or not? Please eliminate my doubts.”
The master said, “Your Lordship, listen well! I will explain this for you.
When the World-honored One was in Śrāvastī, he taught about the Western
[Paradise in order to] entice [the sentient beings of Śrāvastī to practice
Buddhism]. The text of the scripture is very clear [in saying that the West-
ern Paradise] ‘is not far from here.’ If you wish to discuss it, then the ten
ten-thousands and eight thousands of li [from here to the Pure Land] are the
ten evils and eight heterodoxies within the body.
“This is the explanation of [the Pure Land] as distant. The explanation
of it as distant is done on behalf of those with inferior capacities, while the
explanation of it as close is for those of superior capacities. Although there
are two types of people, there are not two different Dharmas. Although
deluded and enlightened [people] are different, [it is only that] there is slow
and fast in seeing. The deluded person recites the Buddha’s [name] and seeks
for rebirth in that other [location], while the enlightened person purifies his
mind. Therefore the Buddha said, ‘As the mind is purified, so is the buddha
land purified.’
“Your Lordship, you are a person of the East: if only your mind is pure,
you will be without transgression. But persons of the West are impure of mind
and are in error. When a person of the East commits a transgression, he may
recite the Buddha’s [name] and seek rebirth in the Western [Paradise]. But
when a person of the West commits a transgression, in what country should
he seek rebirth when reciting the Buddha’s [name]? Stupid ordinary people
do not comprehend their self-natures, and they do not recognize that the Pure
Land is within their own bodies. Whether you wish for East or West, the
enlightened person is the same in either location. Therefore the Buddha said,
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

352b
39
‘always in joyful repose wherever one is.’ Your Lordship, just have your
mind-ground be without that which is not good, and the Western [Para dise]
will not be far off. If you harbor that which is not good in your mind, it will
be impossible to attain rebirth [in the Western Paradise] by reciting the
Buddha’s [name].
“I exhort you now, good friends, to first eliminate the ten evils is to go
the ten ten-thousand [li]. To later eliminate the eight heterodoxies is to pass
beyond the eight thousand [li]. Seeing the nature in successive moments of
thought and always practicing universal directness is to gain a vision of
Amitābha in the snap of a finger. Your Lordship, just practice the ten [types
of] good. Why would you want to be reborn [in the Pure Land]? If you do
not eradicate the ten [types of ] evil from your minds, what buddha will come
to escort you [to the Western Paradise]? If you are enlightened to the sud-
den Dharma (teaching) of birthlessness, seeing the Western [Paradise is a
matter of ] a mere instant. If you recite the Buddha’s [name] and seek rebirth
[in the Pure Land] without being enlightened, how will you ever be able to
travel such a long road?
“I will move the Western [Paradise] for you in an instant, so you will
be able to see it right in front of you. Do you all want to see it or not?”
Those in the assembly all bowed their heads to the ground and said, “If
we could see it here, how could we then want to be reborn there? We ask
that in Your Reverence’s compassion you manifest the Western [Paradise]
for us all to see!”
The master said, “[All of you in this] great assembly, [understand that] the
very form-bodies of people in this world are the city walls [of the Pure Land].
Your eyes, ears, nose, and tongue are the gates [of the Pure Land]. Externally,
you have five gates, and within is the gate of the sensory mind. The mind is the
ground, and the nature is the king. The king resides on the mind-ground, and
the nature exists just as a king exists. When the nature goes, the king is
absent.When the nature is present, the body and mind continue. When the nature
departs, the body disintegrates. ‘Buddha’ acts within the nature—don’t look
for it outside your bodies! When one is deluded as to the self-nature, one is a
sentient being, but when one realizes the self-nature, one is a buddha.
“Compassion is Avalokiteśvara, joy and equanimity are Mahā sthama -
prāpta, the ability to purify is Śākyamuni, and universal directness is Amitābha.
Number Three: Questions

40
The self is Sumeru, desire is the ocean’s water, and the afflictions are the
waves. The poisons are the evil dragons, the falsenesses are the ghosts and
spirits, the enervating defilements are the fishes, lust and anger are the hells,
and stupidity is the animals.
“Good friends, if you always practice the ten [types of] good, you will
go to heaven. By eliminating the [false conception of the] self, Sumeru will
fall; by destroying desire, the ocean’s waters will dry up; by eliminating the
afflictions, the waves will be extinguished; by eradicating the poisons, the
fishes will be extirpated.
“The Tathāgata, who has realized the nature in his own mind-ground,
releases a great refulgence and illuminates the six gates without; its purity
can destroy all the heavens of the six desires. By illuminating the self-nature
within, the three poisons are eliminated, and all the transgressions [leading
to] the hells are dissolved in an instant. Clearly penetrating within and with-
out, it is no different from the Western [Paradise]. If you do not cultivate in
this fashion, how could you ever arrive there?”
When those in the great assembly heard this explanation, they all saw
their natures. They all bowed and sighed, “How excellent!” They cried out,
“We wish that all the sentient beings throughout the dharmadhātu could all
become enlightened instantaneously!”
The master said, “Good friends, if you wish to cultivate this practice,
you may do so either as a householder or in a monastery. Householders who
are able to practice this are like those persons of the East whose minds [har-
bor] good. Those in the monastery who do not cultivate it are like those peo-
ple of the West whose minds [harbor] evil. It is only that the mind should be
pure—then it is the Western [Paradise] of the self-nature!”
Lord Wei asked further, “How can householders cultivate this practice?
I hope you will teach us this.” The master said, “I will recite a formless verse
for this great assembly. Just cultivate according to this, doing exactly as if
you were always with me. If you do not cultivate according to this, what
benefit would it be to take the tonsure and leave home [to become a monk]?”
The verse goes:
With the mind universally [the same], why labor to maintain
the precepts?
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

352c
41
With practice direct, what use is it to cultivate dhyāna?
Gratitude is to be filial in supporting one’s parents
Righteousness is to have sympathy for those above and below.
Self-subordination is to honor the lowly and the familiar.
Forbearance is not to approve of the various evils.
If one is able to rub sticks to create a fire,
The red lotus blossom will certainly grow from the mud.
That which causes the mouth suffering is good medicine.
That which offends the ears is loyal speech.
By reforming transgressions one will necessarily generate wisdom.
To defend shortcomings within one’s mind is not wise.
In one’s daily actions one must always practice the dissemination
of benefit [for others].
Accomplishing enlightenment does not depend on donating money.
Bodhi should only be sought for in the mind.
Why belabor seeking for the mysterious externally?
If you hear this explanation and practice accordingly,
The Western [Paradise] is right in front of you.
The master said further, “Good friends, you should all practice accord-
ing to this verse. See your own natures and directly accomplish the enlight-
enment of buddhahood!
“I cannot wait any longer, and you should all disperse [now]. I am return-
ing to Caoqi. If anyone here has doubts, then come and ask me about them.”
At that time the prefect and government staff, as well as all the good men
and faithful women in the assembly, all attained enlightenment and accepted
and respectfully practiced [Huineng’s teaching] with conviction.
Number Four: Meditation and Wisdom
The master addressed the assembly, “Good friends, our teaching takes med-
itation and wisdom as its fundamental. Everyone, do not say in your delu-
sion that meditation and wisdom are different.
Meditation and wisdom are of one essence, not different. Meditation is
Number Four: Meditation and Wisdom

353a
42
the essence of wisdom, and wisdom is the function of meditation. At times
of wisdom, meditation exists in that wisdom; at times of meditation, wis-
dom exists in that meditation. If you understand this doctrine, this is the
equivalent study of meditation and wisdom. All you who study the Way, do
not say that they are different, with meditation prior to and generating wis-
dom or with wisdom prior to and generating meditation. If your view of them
is like this, then the Dharma would have two characteristics. This would be
to say something good with your mouth but to have that which is not good
in your minds. It is to make meditation and wisdom falsely existent to con-
sider them as not equivalent.
“If there is good in both mouth and mind and if internal and external are
identical, then meditation and wisdom will be equivalent. One should under-
stand oneself that spiritual cultivation does not exist in argumentation. If you
argue about which is prior and which secondary, then you are just like [all
the other] deluded people. Not to desist from competition is to increase the
illusion of selfhood. One will not transcend the four characteristics [this way]!
“Good friends, how is it that meditation and wisdom are equivalent? It
is like the light of a lamp. When the lamp exists, there is light; when there
is no lamp, there is darkness. The lamp is the essence of the light, and the
light is the function of the lamp. Although the names are different, in essence
they are fundamentally identical. The Dharma of meditation and wisdom is
just like this.”
The master addressed the assembly, “Good friends, the samādhi of the
single practice74 is to always practice the single direct mind in all one’s
actions, whether walking, standing still, sitting, or lying down. The Vimalakīrti
[Sutra] says, ‘The straightforward mind is the place of enlightenment, the
straightforward mind is the Pure Land.’ Don’t allow your mental practices75
to become twisted while merely speaking of straightforwardness with your
mouth! If you speak of the samādhi of the single practice with your mouth,
you will not practice the straightforward mind. Just practice the straightfor-
ward mind, and be without attachment within all the dharmas.
“The deluded person is attached to the characteristics of dharmas and
grasps onto the samādhi of the single practice, merely saying that he always
sits without moving and without falsely activating the mind and that this is
the samādhi of the single practice. To have an interpretation such as this is
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

43
to be the same as an insentient object! This is rather to impede the causes
and conditions of enlightenment!
“Good friends, one’s enlightenment (one’s Way, dao) must flow freely.
How could it be stagnated? When the mind does not reside in the dharmas,
one’s enlightenment flows freely. For the mind to reside in the dharmas is
called ‘fettering oneself.’ If you say that always sitting without moving is it,
then you’re just like Śāriputra meditating in the forest, for which he was
scolded by Vimalakīrti!
“Good friends, there are also those who teach meditation [in terms of ]
viewing the mind, contemplating tranquility, motionlessness, and nonacti-
vation. You are supposed to make an effort on the basis of these.76 These
deluded people do not understand, and in their grasping become mixed up
like all of you here. You should understand that such superficial teachings77
are greatly mistaken!”
The master addressed the assembly, “Good friends, the correct teach-
ing is fundamentally without either sudden or gradual—it is human nature
that is either clever or dull. Deluded people cultivate gradually, while enlight-
ened people suddenly conform78 [to the truth]. If you recognize your own
fundamental mind and see your own fundamental nature, there will be no
such distinctions! Thus it is that sudden and gradual are posited as provi-
sional names.
“Good friends, since the past this teaching of ours has first taken non-
thought as its central doctrine, the formless as its essence, and nonabiding
as its fundamental. The formless is to transcend characteristics within the
context of characteristics. Nonthought is to be without thought in the con-
text of thoughts. Nonabiding is to consider in one’s fundamental nature that
all worldly [things] are empty, with no consideration of retaliation—whether
good or evil, pleasant or ugly, and enemy or friend, etc., during times of
words, fights, and disputation.
“Within continuing moments of thought one should not think of the pre-
vious [mental] realm. If one thinks of the previous thought, the present
thought, and the later thought, one’s thoughts will be continuous without
cease. This is called ‘fettered.’ If one’s thoughts do not abide in the dhar-
mas, this is to be ‘unfettered.’ Thus it is that nonabiding is taken as the fun-
damental.
Number Four: Meditation and Wisdom

353b
44
“Good friends, to transcend all the characteristics externally is called
the formless. To be able to transcend characteristics is for the essences of
the dharmas to be pure. Thus it is that the formless is taken as the essence.
“Good friends, for one’s mind to remain undefiled within the sensory realms
is called nonthought. Within one’s own thoughts one should always transcend
the realms, one should not generate the mind relative to the realms. If one does
not think of the hundred things, then thoughts will be completely eliminated.
“It is greatly mistaken [to believe] that as soon as thought is eradicated,
one dies and is born in some other location. Think on this, you who are study-
ing the Way! If you cannot recognize your own mistakes regarding the mean-
ing of Dharma, how much will you mislead others! To be deluded oneself
and not see this is to slander the Buddhist scriptures! Thus it is that non-
thought is taken as the central doctrine.
“Good friends, why is it that nonthought is taken as the central doctrine?
If you depend merely on oral explanations of seeing the nature, [like a] deluded
person you will have thoughts relative to the realms and you will even acti-
vate false views regarding those thoughts. And from this will be generated
all the enervating defilements and false thoughts! There is in the self-nature
fundamentally not a single dharma that can be perceived. To think that there
were any would be a false explanation, a disaster, a false view of enervating
defilements. Therefore, this teaching takes nonthought as its central doctrine.
“Good friends, what is negated by the ‘non’ (wu)? What kind of thing
is ‘thought’? ‘Non’ means to be without the characteristic of duality, to be
without the mind of the enervating defilements. ‘Thought’ is to think of the
fundamental nature of suchness. Suchness is the essence of thought, thought
is the function of suchness. Thought is activated in the self-nature of such-
ness—it is not the case that the eyes, ears, nose, and tongue are able to think,
it is because of the self-nature79 of suchness that thoughts are activated. If
suchness were nonexistent, then eyes and ears, forms and sounds would be
simultaneously destroyed.
“Good friends, thoughts are activated from the self-nature of suchness.
Although the six sensory faculties possess perceptual cognition, they do not
defile the myriad realms. And yet the true nature is always autonomous. There-
fore, the sutra says, ‘When one is able to discriminate well the characteris-
tics of the dharmas, this is to be unmoving within the cardinal meaning.’”80
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

45
Number Five: Seated Meditation
The master addressed the assembly, “In this teaching of seated meditation,
one fundamentally does not concentrate on mind,81 nor does one concentrate
on purity, nor is it motionlessness. If one is to concentrate on the mind, then
the mind [involved] is fundamentally false. You should understand that the
mind is like a phantasm, so nothing can concentrate on it. If one is to con-
centrate on purity, then [realize that because] our natures82 are fundamen-
tally pure, it is through false thoughts that suchness is covered up. Just be
without false thoughts and the nature is pure of itself. If you activate your
mind to become attached to purity, you will only83 generate the falseness of
purity. The false is without location; it is the concentration that is false. Purity
is without shape and characteristics; you only create the characteristics of
purity and say this is ‘effort’ [in meditation]. To have such a view is to obscure
one’s own fundamental nature, and only to be fettered by purity.
“Good friends, if you cultivate motionlessness, just see all people: when84
doing so, do not see the right and wrong, the good and bad, the transgres-
sions and disasters of people. This is the motionlessness of the self-nature.
“Good friends, the deluded person may be motionless in body, but he
opens his mouth and speaks of the right and wrong, the strength and weak-
ness, the good and bad of others. This is to go against the Way. If you con-
centrate on the mind or concentrate on purity, this is to impede the Way (i.e.,
enlightenment).”
The master addressed the assembly, “Good friends, what is seated med-
itation (zuochan)? In this teaching, there is no impediment and no hindrance.
Externally, for the mind to refrain from activating thoughts with regard to
all the good and bad realms is called ‘seated’ (zuo). Internally, to see the
motionlessness of the self-nature is called ‘meditation’ (chan).
“Good friends, what is it that is called meditative concentration (chan -
ding; samādhi)? Externally, to transcend characteristics is ‘meditation’ (chan).
Internally, to be undisturbed is ‘concentration’ (ding). If one concentrates
on85 characteristics externally, internally the mind is disturbed. If one tran-
scends characteristics externally, the mind will not be disturbed. The fun-
damental nature is naturally pure and naturally concentrated; it is only by
seeing the realms and thinking of the realms that one is disturbed. If one can
Number Five: Seated Meditation

353c
46
see the various realms without the mind being disturbed, this is true con-
centration.
“Good friends, to transcend characteristics externally is ‘meditation.’
To be undisturbed internally is ‘concentration.’ Externally ‘meditation’ and
internally ‘concentration’ is meditative concentration.
“The Sutra of the Bodhisattva Precepts says, ‘My fundamental self-
nature is pure.’ Good friends,86 within every moment of thought you should
see yourself that your fundamental nature is pure. You should cultivate for
yourself, practice for yourself, and accomplish for yourself the enlighten-
ment of buddhahood.”
Number Six: Repentance
At one time Great Master [Huineng], seeing that literati and commoners
from all over the Guang[zhou and] Shao[zhou] areas had gathered at the
monastery to hear the Dharma, ascended the dais and announced to the assem-
bly, “Good friends, all of your coming here must have arisen out of your
own identities.87 At all times and in every moment of thought, you should
purify your own minds. Cultivate for yourself, practice for yourself, and see
your own dharmakāya, see the buddha within your own mind. This is only
attained through being saved by one’s own self, by [taking the] precepts
one’s own self—it does not depend on coming here. Hence in coming from
afar and gathering together here, you all share in [the same karmic] con-
nection. Now everyone should kneel upright,88 and I will first transmit for
you the five dharmakāya incenses of the self-natures; then I will bestow the
formless repentances.”
The assembly all knelt upright and the master said, “First is the incense
of the precepts, which is to have no error, no evil, no jealousy, no greed and
anger, and no injury within one’s own mind. This is called the incense of the
precepts.
“Second is the incense of meditation, which is to look on the realms and
characteristics of the various types of good and evil with one’s mind undis-
turbed. This is called the incense of meditation.
“Third is the incense of wisdom, which is for one’s mind to be without
hindrance, but always illuminating the self-nature with wisdom and never
creating the various types of evil. Although one cultivates the myriad types
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

354a
47
of good, one’s mind does not become attached. One is respectful of superi-
ors and mindful of inferiors, taking pity on those poor and alone. This is
called the incense of wisdom.
“Fourth is the incense of emancipation, which is for one’s mind to be with-
out equivocation. Not thinking of good and not thinking of evil, one is
autonomous and without hindrance. This is called the incense of emancipation.
“Fifth is the incense of emancipated perceptual understanding,89 which
is for one’s mind to be without equivocation regarding good and evil. One
must not become immersed in emptiness, protecting one’s tranquility. One
should study extensively and become learned [in the scriptures], recogniz-
ing one’s own fundamental mind and attaining the various principles of
Buddhism. When the softened refulgence touches things there is no self, no
person. Just proceed to bodhi, the true nature of which is unchanging. This
is called the incense of emancipated perceptual understanding.
“Good friends, these incenses will influence each of you internally. Do
not seek outside of yourselves.
“Now I will bequeath to you the formless repentances, so that you may
extinguish your transgressions in the three periods of time and render pure
your three types of karmic activity (i.e., those of body, speech, and mind).
“Good friends, you should say the following in unison after me: ‘From
our past thoughts to our present thoughts to our future thoughts, [so that] in
every moment of thought we are not subject to the defilement of stupidity,
we disciples repent all our transgressions of stupidity and evil actions from
the past. We beseech that [our transgressions] all be instantly eliminated,
never to arise again.
“‘From our past thoughts to our present thoughts to our future thoughts,
[so that] in every moment of thought we are not subject to the defilement of
deceitfulness, we disciples repent all our transgressions of deceitfulness and
evil actions from the past.We beseech that [our transgressions] all be instantly
eliminated, never to arise again.
“‘From our past thoughts to our present thoughts to our future thoughts,
[so that] in every moment of thought we are not subject to the defilement of
jealousy, we disciples repent all our transgressions of jealousy and evil actions
from the past. We beseech that [our transgressions] all be instantly elimi-
nated, never to arise again.’
Number Six: Repentance

48
“Good friends, the above are the formless repentances. What is it that is
called ‘repentance’ (chan)? What is it that is called ‘remorse’ (hui)? Repen-
tance is to repent past licentiousness. One should repent completely for all
one’s evil actions from the past, one’s transgressions of stupidity, pride and
deception, jealousy, and so on, so that they will never arise again. This is
called ‘repentance.’ Remorse is to have remorse for future errors, those from
now on. Since you have become enlightened [to them] now, all one’s evil
actions from the past, one’s transgressions of stupidity, deceitfulness, jeal-
ousy, and so on, are eradicated forever, never to be committed again. This is
called ‘remorse.’ Therefore, it is called ‘repentance and remorse’ (chanhui).
“Ordinary people are stupid and only know they should repent for their
past licentiousness—they do not know they should feel remorse for future
errors. Because they do not have such remorse, their previous licentiousness
is not extinguished and future errors continue to be generated. With previ-
ous licentiousness not extinguished and future errors continuing to be gen-
erated, how can this be called repentance?
“Good friends, now that we have done the repentances, I will express
for you the four great vows. You should all listen closely: the sentient beings
of our own minds are limitless, and we vow to save them all. The afflictions
of our own minds are limitless, and we vow to eradicate them all. The teach-
ings of our own minds are inexhaustible, and we vow to learn them all. The
enlightenment of buddhahood of our own minds is unsurpassable, and we
vow to achieve it.
“Good friends, why don’t we all say [simply] ‘sentient beings are lim-
itless, and we vow to save them all’? How should we say it? Certainly it’s
not me who’s doing the saving!
“Good friends, the ‘sentient beings of our own minds’ are the mental
states of delusion, confusion, immorality,90 jealousy, and evil. All these are
sentient beings, and we must all [undergo] automatic salvation of the self-
nature. This is called true salvation.
“What is ‘automatic salvation of the self-nature’? It is to use correct
views to save the sentient beings of false views, afflictions, and stupidity
within our own minds. Having correct views, we may use the wisdom of
prajñā to destroy the sentient beings of stupidity and delusion, automatically
saving each and every one of them.When the false occurs, it is saved by the
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

354b
49
correct. When delusion occurs, it is saved by enlightenment. When stupid-
ity occurs, it is saved by wisdom. When evil occurs, it is saved by good. Sal-
vation such as this is called true salvation.
“Further, [with the vow] ‘the afflictions are limitless, and we vow to erad-
icate them all,’ one uses the prajñā wisdom of the self-nature to eradicate false
and empty thoughts. And with ‘the teachings are inexhaustible, and we vow to
learn them all,’ one should see the nature oneself and always practice the cor-
rect Dharma. This is called true learning. With ‘the enlightenment of buddha-
hood is unsurpassable, and we vow to attain it,’ one should constantly be able
to practice the true and correct with a humble mind. Transcending delusion and
transcending enlightenment, one should always generate prajñā. Eradicating
the true and eradicating the false, one sees the buddha-nature. This is to accom-
plish the enlightenment of buddhahood upon hearing these words. Always mind-
ful of one’s cultivation, this is the Dharma of the power of the vows.
“Good friends, we have now finished the four great vows. Next I will
bestow upon you the formless precepts of the triple refuge. “Good friends,
take refuge in the Two-legged Honored One of Enlightenment. Take refuge
in the Honored One of the Correct Transcendence of Desire. Take refuge in
the Honored One within the Pure Assembly. From today onward, call on
realization as your teacher and do not take refuge any longer in the hereti-
cal path of the false demons, but be constantly in realization yourselves using
the three treasures of the self-nature.
“I exhort you, good friends, to take refuge in the three treasures of the
self-nature. [The word] ‘Buddha’ means enlightenment. ‘Dharma’ means
correct. ‘Sangha’ means pure. In your own minds, take refuge in enlighten-
ment, so that the deluded and false is not generated. Know the sufficiency
of decreased desires, and be able to transcend wealth and sensual pleasures:
this is called the Two-legged Honored One (i.e., a buddha in human form).
In your own minds, take refuge in the correct, being without false views in
every moment of thought. If you are without false thoughts, then there is no
self to become proud, lustful, or attached: this is called the Honored One
Who Has Transcended Desire. In your own minds, take refuge in purity,
[realizing] your self-nature to be completely unattached and undefiled by all
the realms of the defiled laborings and the desires: this is called the Honored
One within the Pure Assembly.
Number Six: Repentance

50
“If you cultivate this practice, this is to take refuge oneself. Ordinary
people do not understand and from morning to night accept the three refuges,
saying they are taking refuge in the Buddha. Where is the Buddha? If you
do not see the Buddha, how will your entreaties for refuge reach him? Such
words only create false [thoughts]!
“Good friends, you should each examine this for yourselves—do not go
about this incorrectly.91 The sutras clearly say one should take refuge in the
Buddha oneself, but they do not say to take refuge in some ‘other-buddha’
(tafo, i.e., a buddha other than oneself). If you do not take refuge in the ‘self-
buddha,’ you will have no place of refuge [at all]. Today you are to become
enlightened yourselves, and each of you should take refuge in the three treas-
ures of your own minds. Internally regulating the mind-nature, externally
one pays reverence to other people: this is to take self-refuge.92
“Good friends, now that we have finished taking refuge in the three
treasures of our own [minds], you should all concentrate your minds,93 and
I will explain for you the buddha of the self-nature in one essence and three
bodies. I will make you see the three bodies and become comprehensively
enlightened yourselves to the self-nature.
“Everyone should say after me: ‘Within my own physical body (liter-
ally, “form-body”), I take refuge in the pure dharmakāya buddha. In my own
physical body I take refuge in the perfect and complete saṃbhogakāya buddha.
In my own physical body I take refuge in the thousand billion nirmāṇakāya
buddhas.’
“Good friends, the physical body is a house, but you can’t take refuge
in it.94 The three bodies of the Buddha just mentioned exist within the self-
natures, and all the people of this world have them. It is only because one is
deluded as to one’s own mind that one does not see the inner nature, but
seeks externally for the Tathāgata in three bodies.95 Thus one does not see
that the three bodies of the Buddha exist within one’s own body. You should
all listen to this explanation, and I will make you see the three bodies of the
Buddha that exist within the self-natures in your own bodies. These three
bodies of the Buddha are generated from the self-natures, they are not attained
from any external [source].
“What is the pure dharmakāya buddha? The [self]-natures of the people
of this world are fundamentally pure. The myriad dharmas are generated from
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

354c
51
the self-natures. To think of all the evil things is to generate evil practices;96
to think of all the good things is to generate good practices. Thus it is that the
dharmas occur within the self-natures. Just as heaven is always clear and the
sun and moon always bright—it may be that [the sky] above is bright and
[the world] below is dark through being blocked by the floating clouds, but
all at once a wind will rise up and blow the clouds away, so that above and
below are both bright, and the myriad forms are all visible. The natures of the
people of this world are constantly floating, just like the clouds in the sky.
“Good friends, sagacity is like the sun, and wisdom is like the moon.
Sagacity and wisdom are always bright, but through being attached exter-
nally to sensory realms, the floating clouds of false thoughts block the self-
nature, rendering it obscure. If you meet a spiritual compatriot and listen to
the true and correct Dharma, you can eradicate the deluded and false within
yourself, so that interior and exterior are penetrated by brilliance and so that
the myriad dharmas within the self-nature are all manifest. Those who see
the nature are like this. This is called the pure dharmakāya buddha.
“Good friends, take refuge in the self-nature within your own minds.
This is to take refuge in the true buddha. To take self-refuge is to eradicate
all the unwholesome states of mind, jealousy, perversion, selfishness, delu-
sion, disregard of others, deceitfulness, false views, pride, and the unwhole-
some practices of all the periods of time that exist in the self-nature. It is
constantly to see one’s own errors and to refrain from speaking of the good
and bad points of others. This is to take self-refuge. One should always be
humble and practice reverence for all, so that one sees the nature penetrat-
ingly, without any hindrance. This is to take self-refuge.
What is the perfect and complete saṃbhogakāya? Just as a single lamp
is able to eradicate a thousand years of darkness, so can a single [moment of]
wisdom extinguish ten thousand years of stupidity. Don’t think of your pre-
vious errors, and don’t think constantly of [what may happen] later. With
every moment of thought perfect and bright, see your own fundamental nature.
Although good and evil are different, their fundamental natures are nondual.
The nondual nature is called the true nature. To be undefiled by good and evil
within the true nature: this is called the perfect and complete saṃbhogakāya.
“If a single thought of evil97 is activated in the self-nature, it will extin-
guish ten thousand eons of good causes. If a single thought of good is activated
Number Six: Repentance

The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
in the self-nature, one will attain the elimination of evils as [countless as]
the sands of the Ganges River. To proceed directly to the unsurpassable bodhi,
seeing naturally with each moment of thought and without losing the fun-
damental thought: this is called the saṃbhogakāya.
“What are the thousand billion nirmāṇakāyas? If you do not think of
the myriad dharmas, the nature is fundamentally like space (or, “empty”).
A single moment of thought is called a transformation. To think of evil means
transformation into the hells. To think of good things means transformation
into the heavens. Poison and injury are transformed into dragons and snakes.
Compassion is transformed into bodhisattvas. Wisdom is transformed into
the upper realms. Stupidity is transformed into the lower regions. The trans-
formations of the self-nature are extremely numerous. The deluded person
cannot understand this and activates evil in every moment of thought, con-
stantly practicing the evil ways. But when he has a single thought of good,
wisdom is generated: this is called the nirmāṇakāya buddha of the self-nature.
“Good friends, the dharmakāya [buddha] is fundamentally immanent
[within all of us]. To see the self-nature yourself 98 in every moment of thought
is the saṃbhogakāya buddha. The thoughts that derive from the saṃbho ga -
kāya are the nirmāṇakāya buddha. To be enlightened oneself, and to culti-
vate oneself, the merits of the self-nature: this is true taking refuge.
“One’s skin and flesh is the physical body, and the physical body is a
house, but you can’t take refuge in it. Just be enlightened to the three bod-
ies of the self-nature, and this will be to recognize the buddha of the self-
nature. “I have a formless verse, which, if you are able to recite99 it, will
cause you upon hearing these words to melt away in a single instant the delu-
sions and transgressions of numerous eons. The verse goes:
Deluded people cultivate blessings but do not cultivate the Way,
Saying only that to cultivate blessings is the Way.
The blessings from charity and offerings may be unlimited,
But the three poisons100 are originally created in the mind.
Attempting to cultivate blessings and wanting to extinguish their
transgressions,
They may attain blessings in later lives, but their transgressions will
still exist.
52

Number Seven: Encounters
They should simply eradicate the conditions of transgression within
their minds:
This is called true repentance within the self-nature.
Suddenly enlightened to the true transgression of the Mahayana,
Eradicating the false and practicing the correct, they are without
transgression.
Studying the Way is to always contemplate the self-nature:
This is to be identical with all the buddhas.
Our patriarchs have transmitted only this sudden teaching,
And you should all vow to see the nature and be identical to them.
If you wish to see the dharmakāya in the future,
Transcend the characteristics of the dharmas and wash them out of
your minds.
Make an effort to see for yourself, don’t be despondent!
Later, in a single moment, you will suddenly cut off [your thoughts,
thus] ending them forever.
If you would be enlightened to the Mahayana and see the nature,
Reverentially hold your palms together [in the anjalimudrā] and
seek it in utter sincerity.
The master said, “Good friends, you should all recite this. If you prac-
tice according to it, you will see the nature through hearing these words.
Although you may be a thousand li away from me, it will be as if you are
constantly by my side. If you do not become enlightened through these words,
then why have you gone to the trouble of coming a thousand li to see me?
Take care in your going.”
Of the entire assembly who heard this teaching, not one did not achieve
enlightenment and joyfully undertake this practice.
Number Seven: Encounters
After attaining the Dharma in Huangmei, the master [Huineng] returned to
Caohou village in Shaozhou, where no one knew him.
(Another text says, “When the master left he went to Caohou village,
where he stayed more than nine months. The master then said to himself, ‘In
53
355a

The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
less than thirty or so days I will go to Huangmei. This would be the utmost
in seeking the Way; how could I hesitate?’ The time of his going [as given
in this other text] is incorrect.”)
There was a Confucian scholar [named] Liu Zhilue, whose ritual pro-
priety was profound. Zhilue had an aunt who was a nun, named Wujin Zang
(“Inexhaustible Treasury”), who constantly recited the Great Nirvana Sutra.
When the master heard it for a bit, he understood its wondrous meaning and
explained it for her. The nun, who was holding the text, asked about a word,
and the master said, “I cannot read the words, but you can ask me about the
meaning.” The nun said, “If you do not read the words, how can you under-
stand the meaning?” The master said, “The wondrous principle of the buddhas
has nothing to do with words.” The nun was amazed and informed the vil-
lage elders, “This is a man in possession of the Way. You would do well to
ask to make offerings to him.”
There was a great–great-grandson of the Wei [dynasty], Martial Lord [Cao
Cao], named Cao Shuliang, who, along with the local residents, strove to
come do obeisance [to the master]. At that time the old Baolin Monastery
was in ruins, having been burned by soldiers at the end of the Sui [dynasty].
A new monastery was built once again on the old foundation. The master
was invited to reside there, and he suddenly turned it into an abode of the
treasure [of the teaching]. The master stayed there for more than nine months,
when he was once again pursued by an evil mob. The master escaped to the
mountain in front [of the monastery, and the mob] set fire to the forest [to
force him out]. The master escaped by hiding in the rocks, and the rocks now
show the marks of his knees and the design of his robe where he sat in the
lotus position. Because of this, [the spot] is called Escape Rock. The mas-
ter remembered the Fifth Patriarch’s prediction that he should stop and hide
[upon encountering] sympathy and a group,101 and hid in two hamlets.102
The monk Fahai was from Qujiang in Shaozhou.When he first went to study
under the patriarch he asked, “The mind is buddha. Please favor me with
your instructions.” The master said, “For the preceding thought not to be
generated is mind, and for the succeeding thought not to be extinguished is
buddha. That which creates all the characteristics is mind, and that which
transcends all the characteristics is buddha. If I were to explain it completely,
54
355b

Number Seven: Encounters
I could not finish in an eon! Listen to my verse, which goes:
With regard to the mind, it’s called wisdom.
With regard to the Buddha, it’s called meditation.
When meditation and wisdom are maintained equally,
All is pure within the consciousness.
If you are enlightened to this teaching
It is through your cultivation of the nature
Its function is fundamentally birthless;
The dual cultivation is correct.103
Fahai experienced104 a great enlightenment upon hearing these words.
He gave praise in verse, saying:
The mind is fundamentally buddha.
To be unenlightened to this is to subjugate oneself.
I understand the causes of meditation and wisdom.
By the dual cultivation one transcends all things.
The monk Fada was from Hongzhou. He left home [to become a monk] at
age seven, [after which time] he constantly recited the Lotus Sutra. He came
to do obeisance to Huineng, but did not touch his head to the ground. The
master rebuked him, “To bow without touching the ground—can this be any-
thing but irreverent? You must have something on your mind. To what are
you disposed?”105 [Fada] said, “I have recited the Lotus Sutra three thousand
times.” The master said, “Even if you recite it ten thousand times it won’t
help you understand the meaning of the scripture. You should practice along
with me. You’re undertaking this effort without understanding how wrong
it is. Listen to my verse, which goes:
Reverence is fundamentally to bend the canopy of conceit,
So how can one’s head not touch the ground?
Have [the illusion of] selfhood, and transgressions are generated;
Destroy merits, and one’s blessings are beyond measure!
The master also said, “What is your name?” [The monk] answered, “Fada.”
The master said, “You are named Fada (“Dharma Penetration”), but when have
you ever penetrated the Dharma?” He spoke another verse, which went:
55

355c
56
Your name is now Fada.
You have diligently recited [the Lotus Sutra] without cease.
Reciting in vain, you have only been emanating sounds.
It is the wise mind that is called bodhisattva.
Since you have now had this connection [with me],
I will now explain [Buddhism] for you:
Simply have faith that the Buddha was silent,
That [only] lotuses came forth from his mouth.
After Fada heard this verse he said in gratitude, “From now on I will be
deferential toward all. Your disciple has recited the Lotus Sutra without
understanding its meaning, and my mind always harbored doubts. Your Rev-
erence’s wisdom is vast, so would you please briefly explain the sutra’s mean-
ing?”
The master said, “Fada, the Dharma is profoundly penetrating, but your
mind has not penetrated it. The sutra is fundamentally without doubt; it is your
mind itself that doubts. As you recite this sutra, what is its central doctrine?”
Fada said, “This student is dull of disposition and has always just relied
on reciting the text. How could I understand its central purport?”
The master said, “I do not understand words, but try reciting the sutra
for me once and I will explain it for you.”
Fada then recited the sutra aloud. When he came to the “Chapter on
Parables” the master said, “Stop. The central doctrine of this sutra is funda-
mentally the causes and conditions and the appearance [of the buddhas] in
the world. There can be no parables that surpass this.
“What are the causes and conditions? The sutra says, ‘The buddhas and
World-honored Ones only appear in the world through the causes and con-
ditions of the one great affair.’ The one great affair is the perceptual under-
standing of the buddhas. The people of this world are delusively attached to
characteristics externally and delusively attached to emptiness internally. If
one is able to transcend characteristics within characteristics and to tran-
scend emptiness within emptiness, this is to be undeluded both externally
and internally. If you are enlightened to this teaching, your mind will open
up [in enlightenment] in a single moment of thought. This is ‘to open the
perceptual understanding of the buddhas.’
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

57
“‘Buddha’ [means] enlightenment. This may be divided into four teach-
ings: to open the perceptual understanding of enlightenment, to manifest the
perceptual understanding of enlightenment, to be enlightened to the percep-
tual understanding of enlightenment, and to enter the perceptual understand-
ing of enlightenment. If one hears of opening and manifesting, one should be
able to be enlightened and enter. Thus perceptual understanding of enlight-
enment is fundamentally the true nature becoming manifest. You should be
careful not to misinterpret the sutra and have a mistaken view of some other
path. Opening and manifesting, being enlightened and entering, are them-
selves the perceptual understanding of the buddhas. And [those in] our school
are no different. To interpret [the sutra] the way you do is to revile the sutra
and vilify the buddhas. That106 [mind] is buddha, [fully] endowed with per-
ceptual understanding. What use would there be of any further opening?
“You should have faith that the perceptual understanding of the buddhas
is only your own mind. There is no other buddha. It is only that all the sen-
tient beings obstruct their own brilliance by the sensory realms of desire.
Externally conditioned and internally disrupted, they take hectic delight in
sensation. Then they belabor other World-honored Ones to arise from their
samādhi and use various harsh words to get them to stop! Don’t seek out-
side yourself—you’re no different from the buddhas! Therefore [the Lotus
Sutra] says, ‘Open the perceptual understanding of the buddhas.’
“I also exhort all of you to always open the perceptual understanding of
the buddhas within your own minds. The minds of people of this world are
[given to the] false, and they stupidly commit transgressions. With good in
their mouths and evil in their minds, they are lustful, angry, jealous, obse-
quious, and conceited, injuring people and damaging things. They open the
perceptual understanding of sentient beings. If you are able to always gen-
erate wisdom in a correct [state of ] mind, contemplating your own mind,
stopping evil and practicing good: this is to open the perceptual understanding
of the buddhas. You should open the perceptual understanding of the buddhas
in every moment of thought; do not open the perceptual understanding of
sentient beings. To open the perceptual understanding of the buddhas is to
transcend the world. To open the perceptual understanding of sentient beings
is to be in the world. If you only struggle to grasp at thoughts as your task
[in life], how would this be any different from a yak loving [its own] tail?”107
Number Seven: Encounters

Fada said, “If this is so, then should one just understand the meaning
and not bother to recite the sutras?”
The master said, “Can the sutras be in error? How could they impede
your mindfulness? It is just that delusion and enlightenment are in the per-
son, that harm and benefit depend on oneself. To recite with the mouth and
practice in the mind is to turn the sutra. To recite with the mouth without prac-
ticing in the mind is to be turned by the sutra. Listen to my verse, which says:
Deluded in mind, one is turned by the Lotus.
Enlightened in mind, one turns the Lotus.
To recite the sutra without ever understanding
Is to be an enemy of its meaning.
Be without thought and one’s thoughts are correct;
Be with thought and one’s thoughts become false.
If one considers neither with nor without,
And one will always ride the cart of the white bull.
Hearing this verse, Fada unwittingly cried tears of compassion, and upon
hearing the words he experienced a great enlightenment. He told the mas-
ter, “From long ago until the present I have actually never turned the Lotus,
but have been turned by the Lotus.”
Fada announced further, “The sutra says, ‘All the great śrāvakas and
bodhisattvas, even though they think about it and consider it as much as pos-
sible, cannot comprehend the wisdom of the Buddha.’ Now you would have
ordinary people simply become enlightened to their own minds, yet you call
that the perceptual understanding of the buddhas. I am not of superior abil-
ities, but I cannot help but doubt if this is not to revile [the scriptures]. Also,
the sutra talks about three carts, the sheep, deer, and bull carts, as well as the
cart of the white bull. How are these different? I ask Your Reverence to
explain these once again.”
The master said, “The meaning of the sutra is clear; it is you who is mis-
taken. The fault of the people of the three vehicles who are unable to com-
prehend the wisdom of the Buddha lies in their considering. Trying to figure
it out as much as they possibly can, they [only] get further and further away
[from the truth]. The Buddha originally preached this principle for ordinary
people, not for buddhas. Those who were unable to believe left the assembly.
356a
58
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

59
They were completely unaware that they were sitting on the white bull cart,
but went outside to search for the three carts. How much more clearly could
the sutra say to you, ‘There is only the one buddha vehicle and no other vehi-
cle’? Whether there might be two or three or an infinite number of expedi-
ent means, with various stories, metaphors, and sayings, these teachings all
constitute the one buddha vehicle.
“How can you not understand? The three carts are provisional and [were
preached] because of the past. The One Vehicle is true and [was preached]
because of the present. I teach only that you should repudiate the provisional
and revert to the true. After reverting to the true, the true will also have no
name.108 You should understand that all the treasures you have are depend-
ent on you and are used by you. Do not generate the thought of being father,
do not generate the thought of being child, and be without any thought of
their use: this is called maintaining the Lotus Sutra. From eon to eon one’s
hand does not let go of the text, from morning to night there is no time one
is not being mindful of it.”
Fada achieved a revelatory inspiration and leaped up in ecstasy. In verse
he gave praise, saying:
The three thousand times I have recited the sutra
Are forgotten with a word from [Huineng of] Caoqi.
Not understanding the supramundane truth,
How could one exhaust the deluded waste of so many lifetimes?
The sheep, deer, and bull [carts] are provisionally established
To be well lifted up [to the higher level of meaning] early, middle,
and late.
Who understands that he within the house of fire
Is fundamentally the king within the dharmas?
The master said, “From now on you may be said to be a monk who is
mindful of the sutra.” Fada comprehended the mysterious purport through
this and never ceased reciting the sutra.
The monk Zhitong was from Anfeng (Shu Xian, Anhui) in Shouzhou. First
he read the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra, [doing so] about a thousand-plus times. But
he did not understand the three bodies and four wisdoms, so he did obei-
sance to the master and asked for an explanation of these doctrines.
Number Seven: Encounters

356b
60
The master said, “As to the three bodies, the pure dharmakāya is your
nature, the perfect and complete saṃbhogakāya is your wisdom, and the
thousand billion nirmāṇakāyas are your practices (i.e., saṃskāra, “mental
activities”). To speak of the three bodies apart from the fundamental nature
is called ‘having the bodies but being without wisdom.’ If you are enlight-
ened to [the fact that] the three bodies have no self-natures, then you will
understand109 the bodhi of the four wisdoms.110 Hear my verse, which says:
The self-natures are endowed with the three bodies.
Generating illumination, the four wisdoms are created.
Without transcending the conditions of seeing and hearing,
One transcendentally ascends to the stage of buddhahood.
I am now explaining [this teaching] for you.
Believe clearly, and be without delusion forever.
Do not study by racing after it,
And you will always preach bodhi.
Zhitong said further, “How might I hear the meaning of the four wisdoms?”
The master said, “If you understand the three bodies, then you will under-
stand the four wisdoms. How could you ask any further? If I were to speak
of the four wisdoms apart from the three bodies, this would be called ‘hav-
ing the bodies but being without wisdom.’ This would be to have wisdom
but make it into non-wisdom.” He preached another verse, saying:
The great round mirror wisdom is pure in nature.
The wisdom of the universally same nature111 is without illness
in mind.
The seeing of the wondrous contemplation wisdom is not
[the result of] merit.
The wisdom that creates that which is accomplished is identical
to the round mirror [wisdom].
The five and the eighth, sixth, and seventh [consciousnesses]
transform [through] results and causes.112
These are just names that are used, with no true nature.
If one’s sentiments linger not in the places of their transformations,
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

61
In profusion does one generate in the locus of permanence—
the samādhi of the dragon.
(Thus are the consciousnesses transformed into the wisdoms. In the
teachings it says, “Transform the first five consciousnesses into the wisdom
that creates that which is accomplished. Transform the sixth consciousness
into the wisdom of wondrous contemplation. Transform the seventh con-
sciousness into the wisdom of the universally same nature. Transform the
eighth consciousness into the great round mirror wisdom. Although the sixth
and seventh are transformed within the cause, the [first] five and the eighth
are transformed on the basis of the result. Only the names are transformed;
the [consciousnesses] are not transformed in their essences.)
Zhitong [achieved] sudden enlightenment to the nature and the wisdoms.
He then offered this verse:
The three bodies are originally the essence of oneself.
The four wisdoms are fundamentally the understanding of the mind.
The bodies and wisdoms interpenetrate without hindrance,
Responding to things in accordance with forms.
All [deliberate] activation of cultivation is false activity.
To guard one’s abiding is not true serenity.
The wondrous purport has been illuminated by the master.
I will forever forget [all] defiled names.
The monk Zhichang was from Guiqi (Guiqi Xian, Jiangxi) in Xin zhou(?).113
He left home [to become a monk] when he was seven or eight and intently
sought to see the nature. When he paid his respects one day, the master asked,
“Where did you come from, and what do you seek?”
[Zhichang] said, “Recently this student went to Mount Baifeng114 in
Hongzhou, where I did obeisance to Reverend Shenxiu115 and heard his teach-
ing on seeing the nature and achieving buddhahood. Since I was unable to
resolve my lingering doubts, I have traveled this distance to do obeisance to
you. I beseech Your Reverence, in your compassion, to teach me.”
The master said, “How did he (i.e., Shenxiu) phrase [his teaching]? Try
to repeat it for me.”
Number Seven: Encounters

356c
62
[Zhichang] said, “After arriving there I received no teaching for three
months. Because of the importance of the Dharma, one night I entered
[Shenxiu’s] quarters alone to inquire of him, ‘What is my fundamental mind,
my fundamental nature?’ Shenxiu then said, ‘Do you see space?’ I said, ‘I
see.’ He said, ‘When you see space, does it have characteristics or not?’ I
answered, ‘Space is without form. What characteristics could it have?’ He
said, ‘Your fundamental nature is like space in that there is not a single thing
at all that can be seen. This is called correct seeing. For there to be not a sin-
gle thing that can be known is called true knowing. There are no blue and
yellow, long and short. Just see that the fundamental source is pure, the
essence of enlightenment is perfect and bright: this is called seeing the nature
and achieving buddhahood. It is also called the perceptual understanding of
the Tathāgata.’ Even though this student heard this explanation, I was still
not certain, and I beg Your Reverence to teach me.”
The master said, “That teacher’s explanation still allows perceptual
understanding to exist, which is why you were unable to comprehend. I will
now reveal a verse for you:
Not seeing a single dharma but maintaining the view of nonbeing
Is much like floating clouds blocking the face of the sun.
Not knowing a single dharma but maintaining one’s knowledge of
emptiness
Is just like the great void generating lightning and thunder.
When such perceptual understanding arises for the slightest instant,
How can mistaken recognition ever understand expedient means?
You should understand the error of this yourself, in a single moment
of thought,
And the numinous brilliance of the self will be constantly manifest.
When Zhichang heard this verse, his mind became suddenly expansive
[in enlightenment], and he related a verse:
There is no reason to activate perceptual understanding,
To be attached to characteristics and seek for bodhi.
When one’s intelligence116 harbors a single thought of enlightenment,
How can one transcend the delusions of the past?
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

357a
63
The self-nature, enlightened to the essential source,
Illuminates the crazed currents [of awareness].
Without entering the room of the patriarch,
In a daze, going about with two heads.
One day Zhichang asked the master, “The Buddha preached the three
vehicles, and he also spoke of the Supreme Vehicle. I don’t understand these
doctrines and would like you to explain them for me.”
The master said, “When you contemplate your own fundamental mind,
do not be attached to the external characteristics of dharmas. There are no
four vehicles in the Dharma; it is only that peoples’ minds vary. To learn and
recite is the small vehicle, to be enlightened to the Dharma and understand
its meaning is the middle vehicle, and to cultivate according to the Dharma
is the Great Vehicle. To penetrate all the myriad dharmas and to be equipped
with all the myriad dharmas, without any defilement at all; to transcend the
characteristics of the various dharmas, without anything that is attained: this
is called the Supreme Vehicle. ‘Vehicle’ has the meaning of practice and can-
not be argued about orally. You must cultivate yourself, not ask me about it.
At all times the self-nature is itself suchlike.”
Zhichang thanked [Huineng] and served the master until the end of his
years.
The monk Zhidao was from Nanhai in Guangzhou. He requested the bene-
fit [of the master’s teaching], saying “Since this student left home [to become
a monk], I have spent more than ten years perusing the Nirvana Sutra, but
I haven’t understood its message. Would Your Reverence favor me with your
explanation?”
The master said, “What is it you do not understand?”
[Zhidao] said, “I am in doubt about [the lines] ‘All processes are imper-
manent, these being the dharmas of generation and extinction. When gen-
eration and extinction are extinguished, quiescence is blissful.’”
The master said, “What doubts do you have?”
[Zhidao] said, “All sentient beings have two bodies, the physical body
and the dharmakāya. The physical body is impermanent and is subject to gen-
eration and extinction, but the dharmakāya is permanent and is without know-
ing and without cognition. The sutra says, ‘When generation and extinction
Number Seven: Encounters

64
are extinguished, quiescence is blissful,’ but I don’t know which body is qui-
escent and which body experiences the bliss. If it’s the physical body, when it
is extinguished the four elements would disperse. This would [result in a state
of] total suffering, and suffering cannot be called blissful. If it is the dharma -
kāya that becomes extinguished, then one would be identical to the plants and
rocks, and who would experience the bliss? Further, the Dharma-nature is the
essence and the five skandhas are the functions of generation and extinction.
There is one essence and five functions. If generation and extinction are per-
manent,117 if there is generation then the functions should be activated on the
basis of the essence, and if there is extinction then the functions should revert
into the essence. To hear that there is generation once again implies that sen-
tient beings are [subject to] neither annihilation nor extinction. But not to hear
that there is generation once again implies a permanent reversion to quies-
cence, which would [make sentient beings] identical to inanimate objects. If
this were the case then all the myriad dharmas would be contravened by nir-
vana and could not be generated. So how would there be bliss?”
The master said, “You are a disciple of the Buddha, so why are you cul-
tivating the false views of annihilationism and eternalism of the heterodox
paths? To explain the teaching of the Supreme Vehicle on the basis of what
you have just said would be to imply that there is a dharmakāya separate
from the physical body, and that one must transcend generation and extinc-
tion in order to seek quiescence. Furthermore, you have argued from the Nir-
vana [Sutra’s doctrine of ] permanence and bliss that there is a body that
experiences the functions, but this [doctrine was preached on behalf of sen-
tient beings who] poignantly grasp onto samsara and are shamefully attached
to worldly pleasures.
“You should now understand that the Buddha [preached] on behalf of all
deluded people that the five skandhas conjoin to make their own essences
and characteristics.118 [Sentient beings] discriminate all the dharmas as exter-
nal sensory characteristics, taking generation as good and extinction as bad
and being swept along moment after moment. They do not understand that
the dreamlike phantasmagoria are false, and they pointlessly and crazily expe-
rience samsara. Thinking that permanent and blissful nirvana is transformed
into the characteristics of suffering, they rush seeking after it all the time.
Taking pity on such [people], the Buddha indicated the true blissfulness of
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

357b
65
nirvana: if [even] for an instant there is no characteristic of generation and if
[even] for an instant there is no characteristic of extinction, then there will be
no generation and extinction that can be extinguished. This is to have quies-
cence right there. But if when it is right there, one does not have the thought
of it being right there, this is called permanent and blissful. This bliss is not
experienced and it is not not experienced. How can there be the categories of
one essence and five functions? And how could one possibly speak of nirvana
contravening the myriad dharmas and rendering them permanently ungener-
ated? This is to revile the Buddha and destroy the Dharma. Listen to my verse:
The insurpassable great nirvana
Is perfect and bright, always serene and illuminating.
Foolish ordinary people call it death,
And the heretics grasp at it as annihilation.
Those who seek the two vehicles
Refer to it as unconditioned.
Of all that is considered by sentient beings—
Of [all] the sixty-two [heterodox] views—it is the fundamental
[source].
To falsely posit empty names—
How can these be true doctrines?
It is only those who go beyond thinking
Who penetrate and are without grasping and rejecting.
Thereby does one understand the teaching of the five skandhas
And of the self within the skandhas.
Externally manifesting the images of form
And all the characteristics of sound.
[Considering all these to be] universally “same” like dreams or
phantasmagoria,
Not activating the view of [the distinction between] ordinary people
and sages,
Not forming an interpretation of nirvana,
The two extremes [of viewpoint] and the three limits [of time] are
eradicated.
Number Seven: Encounters

66
Always responding to the functions of the senses,
But not activating the thought of “function.”
Discriminating all the dharmas,
But not activating the thought of “discrimination.”
Even though the eon-[ending] fire burns to the floor of the ocean
And the winds pound upon the mountains like drums,
The true bliss of permanent quiescence—
The characteristic of nirvana—is suchlike.
I have now resorted to words to explain it,
So that you would discard your false views.
If you do not follow this verbal interpretation,
You may be able to understand a little bit.
Upon hearing this verse, Zhidao experienced a great enlightenment. He
leapt up [in ecstasy], did obeisance, and retired.
Chan Master Xingsi was born into the Liu family of Ancheng (Jian Xian,
Jiangxi) in Jizhou. Hearing that the teaching [of sentient beings] was flour-
ishing from the Dharma seat at Caoqi, he came to consult and do obeisance
[to Huineng]. He asked, “What task should one undertake so as not to [back-
slide and] fall down the stages?”
The master said, “What have you done in the past?”
[Xingsi] said, “I have not performed even the sagely truth.”
The master said, “What stages would you fall down?”
[Xingsi] said, “Without having performed the sagely truth, what stages
can there be?”
The master was profoundly impressed by Xingsi, and made him the
chief among his followers. One day the master said to [Xingsi], “You should
go off and teach somewhere, so that [the Dharma] is not cut off.”
Xingsi thus attained the Dharma, then returned to Mount Qingyuan in
Jizhou, where he disseminated the Dharma and taught [sentient beings]. (His
posthumous title is Hongji Chanshi [“Meditation Master Extensive Salvation”].)
Chan Master Huairang was from the Du family of Jinzhou (Ankang Xian,
Shaanxi). First he studied under National Master [Lao]an of Mount Song.
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

357c
67
Laoan sent him to Caoqi to consult [Huineng]. When Huairang arrived and
did his obeisance, the master asked “Where have you come from?”
[Huairang] said, “Mount Song.”
The master said, “[No matter] what kind of thing, how would it come?”
[Huairang] said, “If you say it’s like a single thing, then you’re off the
mark.”
The master said, “Then can it be cultivated and realized?”
[Huairang] said, “Cultivation and realization are not nonexistent, but
defilement does not occur.”119
The master said, “If it’s only that [you] here are not defiled, then this is
the mindfulness maintained by the buddhas. You are such as this, and I am
such as this. Prajñātara of Western India predicted, ‘Beneath your feet will
come a pony, who will trample the people of this world to their deaths.’
[What you should do will be revealed] within your mind; do not preach too
quickly.” (One text lacks the twenty-seven characters beginning with “West-
ern India.”)
Huairang experienced a suddenly expansive conjunction [with the fun-
damental mind]. Thereupon, he served as [Huineng’s] attendant for fifteen
years, becoming more immersed in the mysterious profundity day by day.
Later he went to Nanyue, where he greatly disseminated the Chan school.
(By imperial proclamation, his posthumous title was Chan Master Dahui
[“Meditation Master Great Wisdom”].)
Chan Master Yongjia Xuanjue was from the Zai family of Wenzhou (Yongjia
Xian, Zhejiang). When he was young, he studied the sutras and śāstras and
trained in the teaching of cessation and contemplation (i.e., concentration
and insight meditation) of Tiantai. Through reading the Vimalakīrti Sutra he
illuminated his mind-ground. Coincidentally, he visited and discussed [the
Dharma] with the master’s student Xuance. Everything he said was in implicit
accord with the [teachings of the] patriarchs.
Xuance said, “From whom did you attain the Dharma?”
[Xuanjue] said, “I heard that there is a succession of teachers for the
Mahayana sutras and śāstras. Later I became enlightened to the central doc-
trine of the mind of the Buddha [by reading] the Vimalakīrti Sutra. As yet,
no one has verified [my realization].”
Number Seven: Encounters

68
Xuance said, “‘Attained prior to King Sounds of Dignity; becoming
enlightened oneself without a teacher after King Sounds of Dignity.’ In both
cases, this was the heretical path of naturalism.”
[Xuanjue] said, “May I request that you verify [my realization]?”
Xuance said, “My words carry no weight, but in Caoqi there is the Sixth
Patriarch, Great Master [Huineng]. [Students] assemble there from the four
directions like clouds. You would certainly receive his Dharma, and if you
would go there I will accompany you.”
Xuanjue then came with Xuance to consult [the master. Upon his arrival,
he] walked around the master three times, shook his staff, and stood still.
The master said, “Monks are provided with three thousand forms of
deportment and eighty thousand specific practices. Where have you come
from, O One of Great Virtue, to generate such great self-conceit?”
Xuanjue said, “The matter of birth and death is great, and imperma-
nence is rapid and swift.”
The master said, “Why don’t you understand the birthless and compre-
hend that there is no swiftness?”
[Xuanjue] said, “The essence is birthless, and comprehension is funda-
mentally without swiftness.”
The master said, “So it is, so it is.”
Only then did Xuanjue do obeisance [to Huineng] with full ceremony.
He then immediately said he was going to leave. The master said, “Now isn’t
this really swift?”
[Xuanjue] said, “The fundamental is itself motionless,120 so how can
there be swiftness?”
The master said, “Who knows its motionlessness?”
[Xuanjue] said, “You have just given birth to discrimination.”
The master said, “You have profoundly attained the meaning of the birth-
less.”
[Xuanjue] said, “How can the birthless have a meaning?”
The master said, “If there is no meaning, who is it that discriminates?”
[Xuanjue] said, “Nor is discrimination a meaning.”
The master said, “How excellent! But at least stay one night!” From this
time they called him” one-night [Xuan]jue.” Later he wrote the Song of Enlight-
enment, which was disseminated throughout the world. (His posthumous title
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

358a
69
was Wuxiang Dashi [“Great Master Without Characteristics”]. At the time
he was called Zhenjue.)
The Chan monk Zhihuang first consulted the Fifth Patriarch and claimed
that he had attained samādhi. Living in a hut, he [devoted himself to] lengthy
sitting for twenty years. When the master’s disciple Xuance was wandering
through Heshuo (the area north of the Yellow River), he heard of Zhihuang’s
fame and went to [visit him in] his hut.
[Xuance] asked, “What do you do here?”
Zhihuang said, “I enter into samādhi.”
Xuance said, “When you say ‘enter into samādhi,’ does the mind of
being enter or does the mind of nonbeing enter? If it is the mind of non being
that enters, then all the insentient plants and rocks would be able to attain
samādhi. If it is the mind of being that enters, then all the sentient beings
who have consciousness would also be able to attain samādhi.”
Zhihuang said, “When I have entered into samādhi, I am unaware of
the existence of the minds of being and nonbeing.”
Xuance said, “If you are unaware of the minds of being and nonbeing,
then this is permanent samādhi. How can you enter it or come out of it? If
there is entering and coming out, then this is not the great samādhi.”
Zhihuang did not respond. After a while he asked, “From whom have
you succeeded [in this teaching]?”
Xuance said, “My master is the Sixth Patriarch of Caoqi.”
Zhihuang said, “What does the Sixth Patriarch take as meditation?”
Xuance said, “What our master preaches is the wondrously peaceful and
perfectly quiescent: the essence and functions are suchlike, suchlike. The
five skandhas are fundamentally empty, the six [types of] sensory data are
nonexistent. One does not enter and come out of [samādhi], one is neither
concentrated nor disturbed. Meditation is in its nature nonabiding, and the
serenity of meditation transcends abiding. Meditation in its nature is birth-
less, and the thoughts of meditation transcend birth. The mind is like space,
but it is without any thinking of space.”
When Zhihuang heard this teaching, he came to visit the master. The
master asked, “Why have you come?”
Zhihuang related the previous events. The master said, “Truly, it is as
you have been told. You should only have your mind be like space—but
Number Seven: Encounters

70
don’t become attached to the view [that there is] space. Your functions should
be unhindered, being without mind in both motion and stillness. The distinc-
tion121 between ordinary person and sage is forgotten; subject and object122 are
both destroyed. Nature and characteristics are suchlike, suchlike, and there is
no time when one is not in samādhi. (One text is without the thirty-five char-
acters beginning with “You should only,” having merely “The master took pity
on him for the distance he had come and so cleared up his doubts for him.”)
At this Zhihuang experienced a great enlightenment. All that he had
learned in the preceding twenty years had had no impact whatsoever. That
night people north of the [Yellow] River heard a voice from the sky saying,
“Chan Master Zhihuang has attained enlightenment today.”
Zhihuang later took his leave and returned to north of the [Yellow] River
to teach the fourfold congregation.
A monk asked the master, “What type of person attains the doctrine of Huang-
mei?”
The master said, “Someone who understands the Buddha-Dharma.”
The monk said, “Has Your Reverence attained it?”
The master said, “I don’t understand the Buddha-Dharma.”
One day the master wanted to wash the robe that had been bequeathed to
him. Since there was no beautiful spring [nearby], he went about five li
behind the monastery, where he saw that the forest was lush and circulating
with propitious energy. The master shook his staff and stood it upright on
the ground, and a spring flowed forth where he pointed. [The water] col-
lected into a pond, and [Huineng] knelt to wash the robe.
Suddenly, there was a monk on the rock who came forward and bowed,
saying “[I am] Fangbian, from Western Shu (Sichuan). Formerly, I was in
southern India, where Great Master [Bodhi]dharma enjoined me, ‘Go quickly
to China. I have transmitted the treasury of the eye of the correct Dharma
and the robe (saṃghātī) of Mahākāśyapa. It has been transmitted through
six generations and is at Caoqi in Shaozhou. You should go and do obei-
sance [to Huineng].’ I have come from afar, and I would like to see the robe
and bowl transmitted from our master.”
The master showed them to him. [Huineng] asked further, “At what
endeavor do you excel?”
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

358b
71
[The monk] said, “I am good at clay sculpture.”
The master composed himself and said, “You should try sculpting me.”
Fangbian was unable to refuse, and after several days the sculpture was
finished. The likeness was seven inches tall and thoroughly wonderful. The
master laughed and said, “You only understand the nature of sculpture, but
you don’t understand the buddha-nature.” The master reached out his hand
and rubbed the top of Fangbian’s head, saying “Long will you be a field of
blessings for humans and gods.”
(The master recompensed [Fangbian by giving him] the robe. Fangbian
divided the robe into three [parts], one part to cover the statue, one to keep
himself, and one to bury in the ground. He vowed, “In the future, he who
will obtain this robe will be me appearing in the world. I will reside here
and build new [monastery] halls.” In the eighth year of the Jiayou [period
during the] Song [dynasty, or 1063], a monk named Weixian built a hall on
this site and dug into the ground, obtaining the robe, which was still in new
[condition]. The image is at Gaoquansi [“Lofty Spring Monastery”]; those
who pray to it always receive a response.)
A monk cited Chan Master Wolun’s verse, which goes:
Wolun has a technique
By which one can eradicate the hundred thoughts:
The mind nonactivates with regard to the sensory realms,
And bodhi increases day by day.
Hearing this, the master said “[The author of] this verse did not under-
stand the mind-ground. If you practice according to this, you will increase
your fetters.” He thereupon recited a verse, which stated:
Huineng is without techniques
And does not eradicate the hundred thoughts.
The mind is activated frequently with regard to the sensory realms.
How could bodhi increase?
Number Eight: Sudden and Gradual
When the patriarch [Huineng] resided at Baolin[si] in Caoqi, Great Master
Shenxiu was at Yuquansi (“Jade Spring Monastery”) in Jingnan. At this time
Number Eight: Sudden and Gradual

The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
the two schools flourished, and everyone said, “[Hui]neng in the South and
[Shen]xiu in the North.” Hence there was a division into the two schools of
South and North, sudden and gradual, but students did not understand the
purport [of this distinction].
The master told the assembly, “In the Dharma there is fundamentally
one doctrine; it is in people that there is South and North. The Dharma is
thus a single seed, but in seeing it there is fast and slow.What is it that is
named sudden and gradual? The Dharma is without sudden and gradual; it
is people that are clever or dull, therefore the names sudden and gradual. But
Shenxiu’s followers frequently criticize the Southern school, [saying] the
patriarch [Huineng] is completely illiterate, so how could it be better? Shenxiu
said, ‘He has attained the wisdom that is without teacher and is profoundly
enlightened to the superior vehicle. I have not. In fact, my teacher, the Fifth
Patriarch, personally transmitted the robe and Dharma [to him]—how could
this possibly have been in error? I regret I am unable to travel the great dis-
tance to be close to him, but falsely receive the nation’s munificence. You
people—do not linger here, but go to Caoqi to consult [with Huineng and
have your doubts] resolved!’”
One day [Shenxiu] commanded his student Zhicheng, “You are intelli-
gent and wise in many things. Go on my behalf to Caoqi and listen to [Hui -
neng’s] Dharma. Whatever you hear, memorize it and come back and tell it
to me.” Following this command, Zhicheng went to Caoqi, where he joined
the assembly and inquired [of Huineng] without saying where he was from.
At that time the patriarch informed the assembly, “There is now a person
hiding in this assembly in order to steal the Dharma.” Thereupon Zhicheng
came forward, did obeisance, and told everything. The master said, “You
have come from Yuquan[si]; this must have been a plot.”
[Zhicheng] answered, “No, it isn’t.”
The master said, “Why isn’t it?”
[Zhicheng] answered, “Before I spoke up it was, but now that I’ve spo-
ken up it isn’t.”
The master said, “How does your master teach his followers?”
[Zhicheng] answered, “He always teaches his congregation to ‘fix the
mind to contemplate purity and sit constantly without lying down.’”
The master said, “To ‘fix the mind to contemplate purity’ is a sickness,
72

Number Eight: Sudden and Gradual
not meditation. How could it benefit the principle to ‘sit constantly’ with a
rigid body? Listen to my verse:
You can sit [in meditation] without lying down from the day you’re
born,
But when you die you will lie down and not sit up.
One always has this putrid skeleton,
Why should one set such a task?123
Zhicheng did obeisance again and said, “When I was at Great Master
Shenxiu’s, I studied the Way for nine years without achieving enlightenment.
Now I have heard one explanation by Your Reverence and I have conformed
to (i.e., become enlightened to) the fundamental mind. I believe that the mat-
ter of birth and death is important. Would Your Reverence in your compas-
sion teach me further?”
The master said, “I have heard that your master teaches students about
morality, meditation, and wisdom, but I don’t know how he explains them.
What are the characteristics of his practice? Tell them to me.”
Zhicheng said, “Great Master Shenxiu teaches that ‘not to do evil is
called morality, to practice good is wisdom, and to purify one’s own inten-
tions is called meditation.’ Thus does he teach. I wonder, with what Dharma
does Your Reverence teach people?”
The master said, “To say that I have a Dharma for people would be to
deceive you. I simply release people’s fetters according to the situation. The
samādhi of provisional names,124 such as your master’s explanation of moral-
ity, meditation, and wisdom, is truly inconceivable. [But] my view of moral-
ity, meditation, and wisdom is different.”
Zhicheng said, “There can be only one type of morality, meditation, and
wisdom. How can there be any other?”
The master said, “The morality, meditation, and wisdom of your teacher
is directed at people of the Great Vehicle. My morality, meditation, and wis-
dom are directed at people of the Supreme Vehicle.
The enlightenment and understanding [of people] differs, and there is
slow and fast in seeing. Listen to my explanation and [see if] it’s the same
as his. The Dharma that I preach does not depart from the self-natures. To
preach the Dharma apart from the essence is called superficial preaching and
73
358c

is permanently deluded regarding the self-natures. You should understand
that all the functions of the myriad dharmas are all activated from the self-
nature. This is the true Dharma of morality, meditation, and wisdom. Listen
to my verse:
For the mind-ground to be without error is the morality of the
self-nature.
For the mind-ground to be without stupidity is the wisdom of the
self-nature.
For the mind-ground to be without disruption is the meditation of
the self-nature.
Neither increasing nor decreasing, oneself adamantine,
The body going and coming fundamentally is samādhi.
When Zhicheng heard this verse, in gratitude he offered a verse that said:
The five skandhas, the body of phantasmagoria.
How could the phantasmagoria be [penetrated to the] ultimate?
Proceeding back toward suchness,
The dharmas are still impure.
The master approved this, then said to Zhicheng, “The morality, medi-
tation, and wisdom of your master is for exhorting those of small capacities
to wisdom, but my morality, meditation, and wisdom is for exhorting those
of great capacities to wisdom. If you are enlightened to the self-nature, you
need not posit bodhi and nirvana, nor do you have to posit emancipated per-
ceptual understanding. Only when there is not a single dharma that can be
apprehended can one posit the myriad dharmas. To understand this doctrine
is called ‘the body of the Buddha.’ It is also called bodhi and nirvana, and
emancipated perceptual understanding. The person who has seen the nature
apprehends [the dharmas] whether he posits them or not. He is autonomous
in his going and coming, without stagnation or hindrance. He acts in response
to the functions [of students], and he answers in response to their words.
Always manifesting125 his nirmāṇakāya, he never departs from the self-
nature. He attains the samādhi of autonomous disportment in the supernor-
mal powers. This is called seeing the nature.”
Zhicheng further inquired of the master, “What is the meaning of ‘not
positing’?”
74
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

359a
75
The master said, “The self-nature is without error, without stupidity, and
without disruption. In moment after moment of thought, prajñā illuminates,126
constantly transcending the characteristics of dharmas. Independent and
autonomous, he apprehends everything—how could there be any positing?
The self-nature becomes enlightened itself,127 sudden enlightenment and sud-
den cultivation. There is no gradual progression. Therefore, one does not
posit all the dharmas. The dharmas are quiescent—how could there be a
progression?”
Zhicheng bowed [and said], “I wish to attend upon you [and will do so]
morning and night, without remiss.” (Zhicheng was from Taihe in Jizhou.)
The monk Zhiche was from Jiangxi and originally of the surname Zhang and
name Xingchang.While young he was chivalrous. Ever since the division into
North and South, although the leaders of the two schools had eliminated [the
distinctions of] self and other, their disciples competed in their favoritism. At
one time the followers of the Northern school established Shenxiu as the sixth
patriarch and resented the public’s knowledge of the patriarch’s transmission
of the robe. Thus they enjoined Xingchang to come assassinate the master.
Through precognition, the master knew what was happening and placed
ten liang of gold on the dais. That night Xingchang entered the patriarch’s
room and was about to attack him, when the master stretched out his neck
[to make it easier] for Xingchang. Xingchang swung at him three times with
his blade, but [Huineng] was not injured at all.
The master said, “The correct sword is not false, and the false sword is
not correct. Just take your money; do not take the life you [came for].”
Xingchang fell prostrate with shock. After quite a while he came to his
senses and sought [Huineng’s] compassion, repenting his error and wishing
to leave home [to become a monk]. The master then gave him the money,
saying “You should go. I fear my followers would harm you. If you can
change your appearance and return some day, I will accept you.”
Xingchang followed these instructions and escaped in the night. Later
he left home to become a monk, took the full precepts, and vigorously [trained
in Buddhism]. One day, remembering what the master had said, [Xingchang]
came from afar to pay his respects.
The master said, “I have been thinking of you for a long time. What
night did you come?”
Number Eight: Sudden and Gradual

359b
76
[Xingchang] said, “Previously Your Reverence disposed of my trans-
gression. Now, although I have left home and [am engaged in] ascetic prac-
tices, ultimately it will be impossible to reward you for your virtuous [action].
Is transmitting the Dharma and saving sentient beings all that I can do? Your
disciple has been reading the Nirvana Sutra constantly, but I do not under-
stand its doctrines of permanence and impermanence. I beg Your Reverence,
in your compassion, to explain these for me briefly.”
The master said, “That which is impermanent is the buddha-nature. That
which has permanence is all the good and evil dharmas and the mind of dis-
crimination.”
[Xingchang] said, “What Your Reverence has said is quite different from
the text of the sutra.”
The master said, “I transmit the mind-seal of the Buddha; how could
[what I say] differ from the Buddha’s sutra?”
[Xingchang] said, “The sutra teaches that the buddha-nature is perma-
nent, but Your Reverence says it is impermanent. [The sutra says that] the
good and evil dharmas and the mind of bodhi128 are all impermanent, but
Your Reverence says they are permanent. This difference has made this stu-
dent even more confused!”
The master said, “Formerly I heard the nun Wujin Zang read through
the Nirvana Sutra once, and I explained it for her without so much as a sin-
gle character or single doctrine being different from the text of the sutra.
And I ultimately have no separate teaching for you.”
[Xingchang] said, “This student’s understanding129 is shallow, and I ask
Your Reverence to reveal [the teaching] for me in detail.”
The master said, “Do you understand? If the buddha-nature were per-
manent, then no matter what good and evil dharmas one explained, not a
single person throughout the entire eon would generate bodhicitta. There-
fore, I preach that it is impermanent. This is precisely the Way of true per-
manence preached by the Buddha. Furthermore, if all the dharmas were
impermanent, then everything would have its own self-nature that would
experience birth and death, and those true and permanent natures would not
be omnipresent. Therefore, I preach that they are permanent, which is pre-
cisely the true doctrine of impermanence preached by the Buddha.
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

77
“Because ordinary people and heretics are attached to false permanence
and those of the two vehicles consider permanence to be impermanence,
together forming the eight confusions, the Buddha in the authoritative teach-
ing of the Nirvana [Sutra] destroyed their prejudices and revealed his expla-
nation of true permanence, the true bliss, the true self, and true purity. You
are now relying on the words but going against the meaning. With an anni-
hilationist impermanence and a deterministic permanence,130 you have mis-
understood the Buddha’s last words, which are perfect, wondrous, and sub-
tle. What benefit can there be in reading [the sutra] a thousand times?”
Xingchang suddenly experienced a great enlightenment, [after which]
he spoke a verse, which went:
Because we maintain our minds of impermanence,
The Buddha preached of permanence.
Not understanding his expedient means,
I was as if collecting pebbles by a pond in springtime.
Now, without expending any of my own effort,
The buddha-nature is right before me.
It was not bequeathed to me by the master,
And I am also without anything that is attained.
The master said, “You have now penetrated [the true teaching], so you
should be called Zhiche.” Zhiche bowed in gratitude and retired.
There was a boy named Shenhui, who was from the Gao family in Xiangyang.
At age thirteen he came from Yuquan[si] to consult [Huineng]. The master said,
“You131 have gone to great trouble in coming such a distance, but have you
brought the fundamental? If you have the fundamental, then you must recog-
nize the master (zhu, i.e., the host or subject). See if you can explain it to me!”
Shenhui said, “Nonabiding is the fundamental, and seeing is the master.”
The master said, “What will this novice say next!”
Shenhui then asked, “When Your Reverence sits in meditation, does he
see or not?”
The master struck Shenhui with his staff three times and said, “When I
hit you, does it hurt or not?”
[Shenhui] answered, “It both hurts and does not hurt.”
Number Eight: Sudden and Gradual

359c
78
The master said, “I also see and do not see.”
Shenhui asked, “What is this seeing and also not seeing?”
The master said, “My seeing is to see constantly my own mind’s errors.
I do not see other people’s right and wrong or good and evil. This is to see
and also not to see. You said it hurts and does not hurt. How about this? If
you do not hurt, then you’re the same as a tree or rock. If you hurt, then
you’re the same as an ordinary [unenlightened] person, who would become
resentful.When you just said ‘seeing and also not seeing’ [you thought] they
were two extremes, and your ‘hurts and does not hurt’ were [your miscon-
ception of] birth and death. But you don’t see your self-nature, so you’re just
playing around.” Shenhui bowed in gratitude.
The master went on to say, “If your mind is deluded and you do not see,
then ask a spiritual compatriot to show you the path. If you are enlightened
in your mind, then you will see the nature yourself. Cultivate in accordance
with the Dharma. You are deluded yourself and do not see your own mind,
but you come ask about my seeing and not seeing. I see and I understand,
but how could this take the place of your delusion? If you see for yourself,
then you will also be unable to take the place of my delusion. How can you
ask about my seeing and not seeing when you do not understand and have
not seen for yourself?”
Shenhui did obeisance once again, making over a hundred prostrations.
Seeking to put an end to his errors, he served [Huineng] as attendant and
never left his side.
One day the master announced to the assembly, “I have a thing without
head or tail, without name or title, without front or back. Do you know what
it is?”
Shenhui came forth and said, “It is the fundamental source of the buddhas.
It is my buddha-nature.” The master said, “I told you it was without name
or title, but you have called it the fundamental source, the buddha-nature.
You’ve just covered your head with thatch.132 You’ve become a follower
with only discriminative understanding.”
After the patriarch’s extinction, Shenhui entered Changan and Luoyang
and widely disseminated the sudden teaching of Caoqi. He wrote the Expla-
nation of the Central Doctrine, which circulated widely. (This is the Chan
Master of Heze[si (“Lotus Marsh Monastery”)].)
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

79
The master, seeing that many of those who would ask about the schools with
evil intentions had gathered beneath his dais, took pity on them and said, “Stu-
dents of the Way, you should eliminate all good and evil thoughts! That there
are no names that can be named is to name the self-natures. The nondual nature
is called the true nature. It is upon the true nature that all the teachings are
established. At these words, you should see for yourselves!” When they heard
this explanation, they all did obeisance and requested that he be their teacher.
Number Nine: Proclamations
On the fifteenth day of the first month of the first year of the Shenlong [“Divine
Dragon” period, 705, Empress Wu] Zetian and [Emperor] Zhongzong issued
a proclamation that said, “We have invited the two masters Shenxiu and Laoan
to the palace to receive our offerings, [with the suggestion that] the occasion
of ten thousand possibilities always reaches its ultimate in the single vehicle.
The two masters demurred, saying, ‘In the south there is Chan Master Huineng,
who has intimately received the robe and Dharma from Great Master Hong -
ren. He transmits the mind-seal of the Buddha, and you should invite and
inquire [of the Dharma] of him.’ We are now sending Palace Attendant Xie
Jian to hurry [to Caoqi] with Our invitation. We wish the master, in his com-
passionate consideration, to ascend quickly to the capital.”
The master memorialized to the throne, excusing himself on account of
illness [and saying,] “I wish to live out my life in the forests.”
Xie Jian said, “The virtuous Chan monks of the capital all say, ‘If you
wish to understand the Way, you must sit in meditation and cultivate samādhi.
It has never happened that anyone attained emancipation without relying on
meditation.’ I wonder, what is the Dharma that you teach?”
The master said, “One is enlightened to the Way through the mind. How
could it depend on sitting? A sutra says, ‘To say that the Tathāgata sits or
lies down is to practice a false path. Why? Because he is without coming
and without going.’ To be without birth and without extinction is the pure
meditation of the Tathāgata. For the dharmas to be quiescent is the Tathā-
gata’s pure sitting. Ultimately there is no realization, so how could it possi-
bly [depend on] sitting?”
Xie Jian said, “When your disciple returns to the capital, my imperial mas-
ters will certainly ask me [about you]. Please, in your compassion, indicate
Number Nine: Proclamations

360a
80
for me the essentials of the mind, so I may transmit them to the two palaces
and the students of the Way in the capital. It would be like a single lamp
lighting a hundred or a thousand lamps—the darkness would become entirely
bright, brilliant without limit.”
The master said, “The Way is without bright and dark. Bright and dark
are complementary ideas, so even the ‘brilliant without limit’ has a limit.
This is because it depends on the positing of names (i.e., categories). The
Vimalakīrti Sutra says, ‘The Dharma is without comparison, because it is
without mutuality.’”
Xie Jian said, “‘Bright’ is a metaphor for wisdom, and ‘dark’ is a
metaphor for the afflictions. If perchance students of the Way do not use the
illumination of wisdom to destroy the afflictions, how will they be able to
escape beginningless samsara?”
The master said, “The afflictions are bodhi. They are nondual and not
separate. If one [tries to] use the illumination of wisdom to destroy the afflic-
tions, this is the interpretation of the two [Hinayana] vehicles [held by] those
fit for the sheep and deer [carts]. Those of superior wisdom and Mahayana
capabilities are completely different.”
Xie Jian said, “What is the Mahayana interpretation?”
The master said, “Ordinary people see brightness and ignorance as dif-
ferent, but the wise comprehend that they are nondual in their nature. The
nondual nature is the true nature, and the true nature is present in the ordi-
nary and stupid [common people] without decrease, and in the sages and
wise ones without increase. One abides in the afflictions without disruption;
one resides in meditation without serenity. Not annihilationist and not per-
manent, neither coming nor going; neither located in an intermediate loca-
tion nor in the internal and external; neither generated nor extinguished, per-
manently abiding without movement—this is called the Way.”
Xie Jian said, “How does your teaching of neither generation nor extinc-
tion differ from the heretical paths?”
The master said, “When those of the heretical paths preach neither gen-
eration nor extinction, they have extinction put a halt to generation and gen-
eration reveal extinction. Their extinction seems like nonextinction, and their
generation is explained by nongeneration. Our explanation of neither gen-
eration nor extinction is that fundamentally there is no generation and now
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

81
there is no extinction. Therefore, it is different from the heretical paths. If you
want to understand the essentials of the mind, you should simply not think
about all the [different types of] good and evil. You will then naturally attain
entry into the pure essence of the mind, which is peaceful and always serene,
with wondrous functions [as numerous as the] sands of the Ganges River.”
When Xie Jian heard this teaching, he experienced a sudden expansive
great enlightenment. After doing his obeisance, he returned to the palace and
submitted a memorial relating the master’s words.
On the third day of the ninth month of that year, a proclamation was
issued extolling the master: “On account of age and illness, the master
[Huineng] has declined [Our invitation], which was made so that We might
cultivate the Way. The master [may be considered] a field of blessings for
the nation, just like Vimalakīrti, who used his illness to teach the Mahayana
in Vaiśālī. He transmits the mind of the buddhas and discusses the nondual
Dharma. Xie Jian has transmitted the master’s instructions, which are the
perceptual understanding of a Tathāgata. We have accumulated an over-
abundance of auspicious good133 and have planted good roots in the past-
[thus have] We encountered the master’s appearance in the world and the
[teaching of] the superior vehicle of sudden enlightenment. Our gratitude to
the master’s good favor toward Us is neverending.” Along with this were
donations of a vestment (kaṣāya) of valuable Korean material134 and a bowl
made of crystal. An edict declared that the governor of Shaozhou should ren-
ovate the monastery, and the master’s former residence was allowed to become
Guoensi (“Monastery of the Nation’s Gratitude”).
Number Ten: Transmission
One day, the master summoned his disciples Fahai, Zhicheng, Fada, Shen-
hui, Zhichang, Zhitong, Zhiche, Zhidao, Fazhen, and Faru, and said, “You
are different from other people. After my extinction you should each become
a master in a different region. I will now teach you how to preach the Dharma
without losing the fundamental doctrine.
“First you should discuss the three categories of the teaching and the
thirty-six responses of active functioning. Coming out and going in tran-
scend the two extremes. In preaching all the Dharmas, do not depart from
the self-nature.
Number Ten: Transmission

360b
82
“If suddenly someone asks you about the Dharma, say something that
will exhaust dichotomies. [You should] always use the teachings of the
responses, such as the mutual causation of coming and going. The dualistic
dharmas will be thoroughly eliminated, and [the questioner] will have no
recourse (literally, “no place to go”).
“The three categories of the teaching are the skandhas, realms, and
entrances. ‘Skandhas’ refers to the five skandhas of form, feelings, thoughts,
impulses, and consciousness. ‘Entrances’ refers to the twelve entrances
(āyatanas): the six types of external sense data of forms, sounds, smells,
tastes, tangibles, and dharmas; and the six internal sense organs of eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, body, and mind. ‘Realms’ refers to the eighteen realms: the
six types of sensory data, the six senses, and the six consciousnesses. The
self-nature is able to incorporate the myriad dharmas and is named the ‘store-
house consciousness.’ If one activates thinking, it is the ‘transformation con-
sciousnesses,’135 the generation of the six consciousnesses to exit the six
senses and see the six types of sensory data.
“Thus are the eighteen realms. All of them are functions that are acti-
vated from the self-nature. If the self-nature is false, it activates the eight-
een falsely. If the self-nature is correct, it activates the eighteen correctly. If
the functions are bad, then they are the functions of sentient beings; if they
are good, then they are the functions of a buddha. On what do the functions
depend? They exist on the basis of the self-nature.
“The responses include the five insentient responses of the external
realms: the response of heaven and earth, the response of sun and moon, the
response of bright and dark, the response of yin and yang, and the response
of water and fire. These are the five responses.
“There are twelve responses of the words of the characteristics of dhar-
mas: the response of words and dharmas, the response of being and non -
being, the response of form and formless, the response of with characteris-
tics and without characteristics, the response of defiled and undefiled, the
response of form and emptiness, the response of motion and stillness, the
response of pure and impure, the response of ordinary and sage, the response
of monk and layperson, the response of old and young, the response of large
and small. These are the twelve responses.
“There are nineteen responses of functions activated from the self-nature:
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

360c
83
the response of long and short, the response of false and correct, the response
of stupid and wise, the response of foolish and sagacious, the response of
disruption and concentration, the response of compassion and ill-will (liter-
ally, “poison”), the response of morality and transgression, the response of
straight and crooked, the response of real and empty, the response of steep
and level, the response of the afflictions and bodhi, the response of perma-
nent and impermanent, the response of commiseration and injury, the response
of joy and anger, the response of generosity and stinginess, the response of
advancement and regression, the response of generation and extinction, the
response of the dharmakāya and the physical body, and the response of the
nirmāṇakāya and the saṃbhogakāya. These are the nineteen responses.”
The master said, “If you understand how to use these thirty-six responses,
you will be able to explain the teachings in all the sutras. Exiting and enter-
ing transcend the two extremes; the self-nature mobilizes the functions.136
When speaking with people, externally you can transcend characteristics
within characteristics and internally you can transcend emptiness within
emptiness. Those who are entirely attached to characteristics will increase
their false views. Those who are entirely attached to emptiness will increase
their ignorance. Those who are attached to emptiness will slander the sutras.
Just speak and do not use written words. Suppose you do not use written
words.137 If there are also people [to whom] you should not speak, just say
as follows: ‘This is the characteristic of written words.’138 You may also
say,139 ‘I simply speak, but do not posit written words.’ This is not to posit
written words.140 They are also written words. Hearing someone preach, you
may revile them, saying they are attached to written words. You should under-
stand that you may be deluded yourselves and also revile the Buddha’s sutras.
You must not revile the sutras, which is a transgression immeasurable. You
may be attached to characteristics externally and teach141 that one should
seek the true. Or you may extensively establish training centers and preach
about the errors of being and nonbeing. Such people will not be able to see
the nature for eon after eon!
“Simply listen, and cultivate according to the Dharma. Also, do not think
about the hundred things and be impeded with regard to the enlightenment-
nature. If you listen to this explanation and do not cultivate, you will on the
contrary generate false thoughts. Just cultivate according to the Dharma,
Number Ten: Transmission

84
bequeathing the Dharma without abiding in characteristics. If all of you
would be enlightened, rely on this for your preaching, rely on this for your
functioning, rely on this for your practice, rely on this for [all] your actions;
you would not lose the fundamental doctrine.
“When people inquire about the doctrines, when they ask of being,
respond with nonbeing; when they ask of nonbeing, respond with being.
When they ask of the ordinary, respond with the sagely, and when they ask
of the sagely, respond with the ordinary. Through the two modes of speak-
ing you will generate the doctrine of the middle. Respond to them one by
one, and if there are any other questions, make up [your response] accord-
ing to this and you will not go wrong. If someone asks you, ‘What is dark-
ness?’, you should answer, ‘Brightness is the cause and darkness is the con-
dition. When brightness disappears there is darkness. Brightness reveals
darkness, and darkness reveals brightness.’ Through the modes of coming
and going, you will create the doctrine of the middle. All other questions
should be handled like this. Later, when you transmit the Dharma you may
rely on this to develop material for teaching. Don’t lose the central doctrine!”
In the seventh month of the first year of the Taiji (“Great Ultimate”)
[period], the forty-ninth hexagenary year, the Yanhe (“Extended Peace”)
[year, or 712] (This year was changed during the fifth month to Yanhe. In
the eighth month Xuanzong took the throne and [the year period] was changed
to Xian tian [“Preceding Heaven”]. The following year [the year period] was
changed to Kaiyuan [“Opening the Origin”]. The other text[s] have this as
[occurring during] Xiantian, but this is incorrect.), the master ordered his
followers to go to Guoensi in Xinzhou to construct a stupa. He had them
hurry the work, and the unveiling was at the end of the summer the follow-
ing year. On the first day of the seventh month [of 713] he assembled his
followers and said, “I will depart from this world in the eighth month. If any
of you have doubts, you should ask me about them soon, and I will resolve
(literally, “destroy”) your doubts for you and make your delusions disappear.
After I am gone, there will be no one to teach you.”
Fahai and the others listened, and everyone wept. Only Shenhui was
emotionally unmoved and did not cry. The master said, “Young master Shen-
hui, you have become able to be unmoved before good and bad, before praise
and blame, without generating sorrow and joy! You others have not attained
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

361a
85
this—what Way can you have been cultivating all these years on this moun-
tain? Who is it you’re crying for so sadly now? If you’re sorry for me, you
don’t know where I’m going. I know myself where I’m going. If I didn’t
know where I was going, I wouldn’t be announcing it to you in advance!
You’re all crying because you don’t know where I’m going. If you knew
where I was going, then you wouldn’t be crying. The Dharma-nature is fun-
damentally without generation and extinction, going and coming. You should
all sit down, and I will recite a verse for you. It is called the ‘Verse of True
and Provisional and Motion and Stillness.’ You should recite this verse, with
the same meaning as mine. You should cultivate according to this, without
losing the central doctrine.”
The assembly of monks bowed and requested that the master recite the
verse. The verse went:
All [things] are without any truth.
Do not see them as true.
If you see the true,
This is for what you see to be completely untrue.
If you are able to possess the true yourself,
Transcend the provisional and your mind will be true.
If you do not transcend the provisional in your own mind,
You will be without the true, for where could the true be located?
If you are sentient, then you are able to move;
That which is insentient is immobile.
If you cultivate the practice of motionlessness,
You become identical to the immobility of insentiency.
If you are seeking the true motionlessness,
[Then realize that] there is a motionlessness of motion.
Motionlessness is motionlessness;142
Insentient [objects] lack the seeds of buddhahood.
If you are able to discriminate well characteristics,
The cardinal meaning [of Buddhism] is motionlessness.
Just to have such a view
Is to have functioning that is suchlike.
Number Ten: Transmission

86
I am telling you students,
Make an effort! And be careful!
Do not in this gateway of the Mahayana
Grasp onto the wisdom of birth and death!
If you can correspond [to the truth] upon hearing these words,
Then we may discuss the doctrines of the Buddha together.
If you in fact do not achieve correspondence,
Then hold your palms together [in the anjalimudrā] and be joyful
[that you’ve encountered the teaching at all]!
This teaching is fundamentally without disputation,
For disputation leads only to errors.143
To grasp and oppose and dispute the teaching
Is for one’s nature to enter into birth and death.
After the assembly heard [Huineng] speak this verse, they all did obei-
sance. Everyone there understood the master’s point, and they all composed
their minds [and became determined] to cultivate in reliance on the Dharma
without any further disputation.
Realizing that Great Master [Huineng] would not remain in the world for
long, Elder Fahai bowed once more and asked, “After Your Reverence has
entered nirvana, to whom will the robe and Dharma be bequeathed?”
The master said, “There is a summary in circulation of my sermon at Dafansi
[and my teachings] up to now, entitled Platform Sutra of the Dharma Treas-
ure. You should all protect [this text] and transmit it. In your saving of the myr-
iad living beings, you should rely on only these sermons. This is called the cor-
rect Dharma. I have preached the Dharma for you now, [but] I will not bequeath
the robe. This is because your roots of faith are mature, you are definitely with-
out doubt, and you are able to undertake the great affair. In accordance with the
intention of the former patriarch, Great Master [Bodhi]dharma, in the bequest
of his [final] verse, the robe should not be transmitted. His verse went:
I originally came to this land
To transmit the Dharma and save deluded sentient beings.
A single flower opens into five leaves,
And the fruit will appear of itself.
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

361b
87
The master said further, “Good friends, you have each purified your
minds and listened to me preach the Dharma. If you wish to achieve the
planting [of the roots] of wisdom,144 you must master the samādhi of the sin-
gle characteristic and the samādhi of the single practice. If in all locations
you do not reside in characteristics, if within those characteristics you do not
generate revulsion or attraction and are also without grasping or rejecting,
if you do not think about matters such as the creation and destruction of [per-
sonal] benefit, and if you are relaxed and quiet and emptily melded with the
pallid and simple, this is called the samādhi of the single characteristic.
“If in all your walking, standing still, sitting, and lying down you have
a pure and unified straightforward mind, not moving [from the] place of
enlightenment, truly creating a pure land, this is called the samādhi of the
single practice.
“Those who accomplish both samādhis are like the earth bearing seeds,
which it stores and nourishes during their maturation into fruit. So is it with
the [samādhis of] the single characteristic and single practice. My preach-
ing the Dharma to you now is like the timely rains that moisten the great
earth, and your buddha-natures are likened to the seeds: encountering this
watering, [your buddha-natures] will all begin to grow. Those who partake
of my meaning will definitely attain bodhi! Those who rely upon my prac-
tice will certainly realize the wondrous fruit! Listen to my verse, which says:
The mind-ground stores the various seeds,
Which all sprout through the universal rain.
With the flower of sudden enlightenment, intelligence is ended,
And the fruit of bodhi forms of itself.
After the master spoke this verse he said, “The Dharma is nondual, and
the mind is likewise. The Way (dao, enlightenment) is pure and without the
various characteristics. You should all be careful not to contemplate purity
or make the mind empty. The mind is pure and cannot be grasped or rejected.
You should all make an effort! Go well, according to your needs.” The mem-
bers of the congregation then bowed and dispersed.
On the eighth day of the seventh month, Great Master [Huineng] suddenly
addressed his followers, saying, “I am going to return to Xinzhou. Get a boat
Number Ten: Transmission

361c
88
ready quickly!” The large congregation then cried out, trying their best to
get him to stay.
The master said, “The appearance of the buddhas is like their manifesta-
tion of nirvana. Where there is coming, there must be going; this is an ever-
lasting rule. There must be some location towhich this skeletal form will revert.”
The congregation said, “When you leave here, how soon will you return?”
The master said, “Leaves fall and revert to roots. I cannot say when I
will return.”
They asked further, “To whom has the storehouse of the eye of the cor-
rect Dharma been transmitted?”
The master said, “Those who are enlightened have attained it; those who
are without mind have penetrated it.”
They asked again, “Won’t there be some difficulties in the future?”
The master said, “Five or six years after my nirvana, a person will come
to take my head. Listen to my prediction, ‘On the head cultivating intimacy,
in the mouth a need for repast. Encountering the difficulty of sufficiency,
with willows the officials.’”
[Huineng] also said, “Seventy years after I go, two bodhisattvas will
come from the East, one a monk and one a layman. They will simultane-
ously establish my teaching and make it flourish, decorating the monaster-
ies and making many transmissions.”
[The members of the congregation] asked, “We do not know through
what generations the transmission has proceeded from the appearance of the
buddhas and patriarchs of the past. Please reveal this to us.”
The master said, “The ancient buddhas have responded to the world in
numbers unmeasurable and beyond calculation. For the moment, [however,]
we take seven buddhas as the beginning: Vipaśyin Buddha, Śikhin Buddha,
and Viśvabhū Buddha of the ornamentation eon of the past; and Kraku -
cchanda Buddha, Kanakamuni Buddha, Kāśyapa Buddha, and Śākyamuni
Buddha of the present auspicious eon: these are the seven buddhas.
“Taking Śākyamuni Buddha as the first of these seven buddhas, the
transmission [is as follows]: number one, the Honored One Mahākāśyapa;
number two, the Honored One Ānanda; number three, the Honored One
Śaṇavāsa; number four, the Honored One Upagupta; number five, the Hon-
ored One Dhītika; number six, the Honored One Miśraka; number seven,
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

89
the Honored One Vasumitra; number eight, the Honored One Buddhanandi;
number nine, the Honored One Buddhamitra; number ten, the Honored One
Pārśva; number eleven, the Honored One Puṇyayaśas; number twelve, the
Honored One Aśvaghoṣa; number thirteen, the Honored One Kapimala; num-
ber fourteen, the Honored One Nāgārjuna; number fifteen, the Honored One
Kāṇadeva; number sixteen, the Honored One Rāhulata; number seventeen,
the Honored One Saṃghanandi; number eighteen, the Honored One Gayaśata;
number nineteen, the Honored One Kumāralāta; number twenty, the Hon-
ored One Jayata; number twenty-one, the Honored One Vasubandhu; num-
ber twenty-two, the Honored One Manorahita; number twenty-three, the
Honored One Halenayaśas; number twenty-four, the Honored One Siṃha
Bhikṣu; number twenty-five, the Honored One Vasiṣṭa; number twenty-six,
the Honored One Puṇyamitra; number twenty-seven, the Honored One Prajñā -
tāra; number twenty-eight, the Honored One Venerable Bodhidharma (the
initial patriarch in this land); number twenty-nine, Great Master Huike;
number thirty, Great Master Sengcan; number thirty-one, Great Master
Daoxin; and number thirty-two, Great Master Hongren.
“[I,] Huineng, am the thirty-third patriarch. From the beginning, the
patriarchs have each had successors. In the future, when it comes to letting
the transmission be carried onward, you must not make mistakes!”
Great Master [Huineng], after a vegetarian feast at Guoensi [in Xinzhou] on
the initial third day of the eighth month of the fiftieth hexagenary year, the
second year of the Xiantian [period, or 713] (In the twelfth month of this
year, [the year period] was changed to Kaiyuan.), addressed his followers,
“All of you, sit according to your stations. I am going to part from you.”
Fahai addressed him, “Your Reverence, what teaching is it you leave so
that the deluded people of later times will be able to see the buddha-nature?”
The master said, “All of you, listen well. If the deluded people of some
later time recognize sentient beings, [they will recognize them] as the buddha -
nature. If they do not recognize sentient beings, they could seek the Buddha
for ten thousand eons without ever meeting him. I teach you now: to recog-
nize the sentient being in one’s own mind is to see the buddha-nature in one’s
own mind. If you wish to see the Buddha, just recognize the sentient being
[in your mind]. It is only sentient beings who are deluded as to the Buddha;
the buddhas are not deluded about sentient beings. If you are enlightened to
Number Ten: Transmission

362a
90
your self-nature, then the sentient being is the Buddha; if you are deluded as
to the self-nature, then [what might be] a ‘buddha’ is [only] a sentient being.145
If the self-nature is universally ‘same’ (i.e., level), the sentient being is a
buddha; if the self-nature is false and steep, the buddha is a sentient being. If
your minds are steep and crooked, then the buddha is [hidden] within the sen-
tient being. If a single moment of thought is level and direct, then the sen-
tient being becomes a buddha. One’s own mind possesses the Buddha, and
this own-buddha is the true Buddha. If one is without the buddha-mind one-
self, where could one seek the true Buddha? Your own minds are the Buddha,
do not doubt this! Outside of this there is not a single thing that can be posited!
All of us generate the ten thousand types of dharmas from our fundamental
minds. Therefore, the sutra says ‘When the mind is generated, the various
types of dharmas are generated; when the mind is extinguished, the various
types of dharmas are extinguished.’
“I will now leave a verse for you in parting, called the ‘Verse of the True
Buddha of the Self-nature.’ If people of later times understand the point of
this verse, they will see their own fundamental minds and achieve the enlight-
enment of buddhahood. The verse goes:
The suchlike self-nature is the true Buddha;
False views and the three poisons are King Māra.
During false delusion Māra is in one’s home;
During correct views the Buddha is in one’s hall.
When false views and the three poisons are generated in the nature,
This is for King Māra to come reside in one’s home.
When with correct views one eradicates the three poisonous
[states of] mind,
Māra is transformed into the Buddha, true and not provisional.
The dharmakāya, saṃbhogakāya, and nirmāṇakāya—
The three bodies are fundamentally a single body.
If one can see it oneself within the nature,
This is the cause of bodhi and the achievement of buddhahood.
From the nirmāṇakāya is fundamentally generated the pure nature;
The pure nature is always within the nirmāṇakāya.
The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch

362b
91
The nature makes the nirmāṇakāya practice the correct [eightfold]
path,
And in the future will be perfect and complete, true without limit.
The licentious nature is fundamentally a cause [within] the pure
nature;146
To eliminate the licentious [results in] the body of the pure nature.
Within the nature you should all transcend the five desires;
In the instant that you see the nature, they are true.
If you have encountered the sudden teaching in this lifetime,
Become enlightened immediately to the self-nature and see the
World-honored One.
If you cultivate by trying to become a buddha,
You’ll never know where to seek for the true.
If you are able to see the true in your own mind,
Having the true will be the cause of your achieving buddhahood.
If you do not see the self-nature but seek the Buddha externally,
Every activation of your mind will be that of a big fool.
This sudden teaching is being left [for you] now,
But you must cultivate it yourself in order to save others.
I tell you, future students of the Way,
If your view is not like this, [you will come to] great sorrow!
After the master spoke this verse he announced, “You may all stay here,
but after my nirvana do not become upset and cry tears like rain. Those who
accept condolences from others or wear mourning clothes are not my disci-
ples and are not [following] the correct Dharma. Just recognize your own
fundamental minds and see your own fundamental natures, [which are] nei-
ther moving nor still, neither generated nor extinguished, neither going nor
coming, neither correct nor false, neither abiding nor going.
“I am afraid your minds are deluded and you don’t understand my mean-
ing. I will tell you again, in order to make you see your natures. After my nir-
vana, practice in accordance with this just as if I were alive. If you go against
my teaching, it would be no use even if I were alive. I will say another verse:
Number Ten: Transmission

The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
Stupefied,147 not cultivating good.
Leaping, not creating evil.
Serene, eradicating knowledge.
Vast, the mind unattached.
When the master finished saying this verse, he sat upright until the third
watch [of the night]. Suddenly he announced to his followers, “I am going,”
and, peacefully, he went. At the time a strange fragrance filled the room, a
white rainbow touched the earth, trees in the forest changed to white, and
the birds and animals cried out.
In the eleventh month the officials of the three prefectures Guang[zhou],
Shao[zhou], and Xin[zhou], the monks, and the laypeople argued over who
was to receive [the master’s] body. Since they could not decide, they burned
incense to gain a portent, saying, “The smoke from the incense will indicate
the direction in which the master’s body should return.” The smoke from
the incense connected directly to Caoqi.
On the thirteenth day of the eleventh month, [the master’s] casket and
the robe and bowl he had transmitted were returned [to Caoqi]. In the sev-
enth month of the next year, the casket was opened, and the disciple Fang-
bian spread incense paste on [the master’s remains]. Remembering the pre-
diction about the taking of the head, they lacquered the master’s neck with
metal sheets and placed it in his stupa. Suddenly, a white light appeared from
inside the stupa that went straight up to heaven. Three days later it began to
dissipate. [The prefect of] Shaozhou memorialized [about these happenings],
and an edict was promulgated for the establishment of a stele recording the
master’s spiritual activities.
The master was seventy-six. He [received the] transmission of the robe
at age twenty-four and offered up his hair [to become a monk] at age thirty-
nine. He preached the Dharma to benefit sentient beings for thirty-seven
years, and transmitted the Dharma to forty-three people. The number who
became enlightened and transcended [the state of unenlightened] ordinary
person cannot be known.
The robe that was transmitted by Bodhi[dharma as an emblem of the]
faith (which was of quxuan cotton148 from the Western Region), a precious
bowl of polished māṇava given by [Emperor] Zhongzong, the image of the
92

Number Ten: Transmission
master sculpted by Fangbian, and his religious implements are stored for-
ever at the training center at Baolin[si]. This Platform Sutra has been trans-
mitted in order to make manifest the central doctrine, to disseminate the triple
treasure, and to benefit all living beings.
End of The Platform Sutra of the Dharma Treasure
of the Great Master, the Sixth Patriarch.
93

362c
95